Project Hail Mary is a work of fiction.

Names, characters, places, and incidents are the products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

Any resemblance to actual events, locales, or persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental.

Published in the United States by Ballantine Books, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.

B and the H colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.

Names: Weir, Andy, author.

Title: Project Hail Mary: a novel / Andy Weir.

Subjects: GSAFD: Science fiction.

Classification: LCC PS3623.E4324494 P76 2021 (print) | LCC PS3623.E4324494 (ebook) | DDC 813/.6-dc23 Title page image: iStock/Roman Kulinskiy Rocket diagrams:  David Lindroth Inc.

Book design by Caroline Cunningham, adapted for ebook Cover design: Will Staehle ep_prh_5.6.1_c0_r0 Contents Cover Title Page Chapter Vl Acknowledgments By Andy Weir About the Author "W hat's two plus two?"

Something about the question irritates me.

I'm tired.

I drift back to sleep.

A few minutes pass, then I hear it again.

"What's two plus two?"

The soft, feminine voice lacks emotion and the pronunciation is identical to the previous time she said it.

It's a computer.

A computer is hassling me.

I'm even more irritated now.

"Lrmln,"

I say.

I'm surprised.

I meant to say "Leave me alone"-a completely reasonable response in my opinion-but I failed to speak.

"Incorrect,"

says the computer.

"What's two plus two?"

Time for an experiment.

I'll try to say hello.

"Hlllch?"

I say.

"Incorrect.

What's two plus two?"

What's going on?

I want to find out, but I don't have much to work with.

I can't see.

I can't hear anything other than the computer.

I can't even feel.

No, that's not true.

I feel something.

I'm lying down.

I'm on something soft.

A bed.

I think my eyes are closed.

That's not so bad.

All I have to do is open them.

I try, but nothing happens.

Why can't I open my eyes?

Open.

Aaaand...open!

Open, dang it!

Ooh!

I felt a wiggle that time.

My eyelids moved.

I felt it.

Open!

My eyelids creep up and blinding light sears my retinas.

"Glunn!"

I say.

I keep my eyes open with sheer force of will.

Everything is white with shades of pain.

"Eye movement detected,"

my tormenter says.

"What's two plus two?"

The whiteness lessens.

My eyes are adjusting.

I start to see shapes, but nothing sensible yet.

Let's see...can I move my hands?

No.

Feet?

Also no.

But I can move my mouth, right?

I've been saying stuff.

Not stuff that makes sense, but it's something.

"Fffr."

"Incorrect.

What's two plus two?"

The shapes start to make sense.

I'm in a bed.

It's kind of...

oval-shaped.

LED lights shine down on me.

Cameras in the ceiling watch my every move.

Creepy though that is, I'm much more concerned about the robot arms.

The two brushed-steel armatures hang from the ceiling.

Each has an assortment of disturbingly penetration-looking tools where hands should be.

Can't say I like the look of that.

"Ffff...oooh...rrrr,"

I say.

Will that do?

"Incorrect.

What's two plus two?"

Dang it.

I summon all my willpower and inner strength.

Also, I'm starting to panic a little.

Good.

I use that too.

"Fffoouurr,"

I finally say.

"Correct."

Thank God.

I can talk.

Sort of.

I breathe a sigh of relief.

Wait-I just controlled my breathing.

I take another breath.

On purpose.

My mouth is sore.

My throat is sore.

But it's my soreness.

I have control.

I'm wearing a breathing mask.

It's tight to my face and connected to a hose that goes behind my head.

Can I get up?

No.

But I can move my head a little.

I look down at my body.

I'm naked and connected to more tubes than I can count.

There's one in each arm, one in each leg, one in my "gentlemen's equipment,"

and two that disappear under my thigh.

I'm guessing one of them is up where the sun doesn't shine.

That can't be good.

Also, I'm covered with electrodes.

The sensor-type stickers like for an EKG, but they're all over the place.

Well, at least they're only on my skin instead of jammed into me.

"Wh-"

I wheeze.

I try again.

"Where...am...I?"

"What's the cube root of eight?"

the computer asks.

"Where am I?"

I say again.

This time it's easier.

"Incorrect.

What's the cube root of eight?"

I take a deep breath and speak slowly.

"Two times e to the two-i-pi."

"Incorrect.

What's the cube root of eight?"

But I wasn't incorrect.

I just wanted to see how smart the computer was.

Answer: not very.

"Two,"

I say.

"Correct."

I listen for follow-up questions, but the computer seems satisfied.

I'm tired.

I drift off to sleep again.

- I wake up.

How long was I out?

It must have been a while because I feel rested.

I open my eyes without any effort.

That's progress.

I try to move my fingers.

They wiggle as instructed.

All right.

Now we're getting somewhere.

"Hand movement detected,"

says the computer.

"Remain still."

"What?

Why-"

The robot arms come for me.

They move fast.

Before I know it, they've removed most of the tubes from my body.

I didn't feel a thing.

Though my skin is kind of numb anyway.

Only three tubes remain: an IV in my arm, a tube up my butt, and a catheter.

Those latter two are kind of the signature items I wanted removed, but okay.

I raise my right arm and let it fall back to the bed.

I do the same for my left.

They feel heavy as heck.

I repeat the process a few times.

My arms are muscular.

That doesn't make sense.

I assume I've had some massive medical problem and been in this bed for a while.

Otherwise, why would they have me hooked up to all the stuff?

Shouldn't there be muscle atrophy?

And shouldn't there be doctors?

Or maybe the sounds of a hospital?

And what's with this bed?

It's not a rectangle, it's an oval and I think it's mounted to the wall instead of the floor.

"Take..."

I trail off.

Still kind of tired.

"Take the tubes out...."

The computer doesn't respond.

I do a few more arm lifts.

I wiggle my toes.

I'm definitely getting better.

I tilt my ankles back and forth.

They're working.

I raise my knees up.

My legs are well toned too.

Not bodybuilder thick, but still too healthy for someone on the verge of death.

I'm not sure how thick they should be, though.

I press my palms to the bed and push.

My torso rises.

I'm actually getting up!

It takes all my strength but I soldier on.

The bed rocks gently as I move.

It's not a normal bed, that's for sure.

As I raise my head higher up, I see the head and foot of the elliptical bed are attached to strong-looking wall mounts.

It's kind of a rigid hammock.

Weird.

Soon, I'm sitting on my butt tube.

Not the most comfortable sensation, but when is a tube up your butt ever comfortable?

I have a better view of things now.

This is no ordinary hospital room.

The walls look plastic and the whole room is round.

Stark-white light comes from ceiling-mounted LED lights.

There are two more hammock-like beds mounted to the walls, each with their own patient.

We are arranged in a triangle and the roof-mounted Arms of Harassment are in the center of the ceiling.

I guess they take care of all three of us.

I can't see much of my compatriots-they've sunken into their bedding like I had.

There's no door.

Just a ladder on the wall leading to...a hatch?

It's round and has a wheel-handle in the center.

Yeah, it's got to be some kind of hatch.

Like on a submarine.

Maybe the three of us have a contagious disease?

Maybe this is an airtight quarantine room?

There are small vents here and there on the wall and I feel a little airflow.

It could be a controlled environment.

I slide one leg off over the edge of my bed, which makes it wobble.

The robot arms rush toward me.

I flinch, but they stop short and hover nearby.

I think they're ready to grab me if I fall.

"Full-body motion detected,"

the computer says.

"What's your name?"

"Pfft, seriously?"

I ask.

"Incorrect.

Attempt number two: What's your name?"

I open my mouth to answer.

"Uh..."

"Incorrect.

Attempt number three: What's your name?"

Only now does it occur to me: I don't know who I am.

I don't know what I do.

I don't remember anything at all.

"Um,"

I say.

"Incorrect."

A wave of fatigue grips me.

It's kind of pleasant, actually.

The computer must have sedated me through the IV line.

"...waaaait..."

I mumble.

The robot arms lay me gently back down to the bed.

- I wake up again.

One of the robot arms is on my face.

What is it doing?!

I shudder, more shocked than anything else.

The arm retracts back to its home in the ceiling.

I feel my face for damage.

One side has stubble and the other is smooth.

"You were shaving me?"

"Consciousness detected,"

the computer says.

"What's your name?"

"I still don't know that."

"Incorrect.

Attempt number two: What's your name?"

I'm Caucasian, I'm male, and I speak English.

Let's play the odds.

"JJohn?"

"Incorrect.

Attempt number three: What's your name?"

I pull the IV out of my arm.

"Bite me."

"Incorrect."

The robot arms reach for me.

I roll off the bed, which is a mistake.

The other tubes are still connected.

The butt tube comes right out.

Doesn't even hurt.

The still- inflated catheter yanks right out of my penis.

And that does hurt.

It's like peeing a golf ball.

I scream and writhe on the floor.

"Physical distress,"

says the computer.

The arms give chase.

I crawl along the floor to escape.

I get under one of the other beds.

The arms stop short, but they don't give up.

They wait.

They're run by a computer.

It's not like they'll run out of patience.

I let my head fall back and gasp for breath.

After a while, the pain subsides and I wipe tears from my eyes.

I have no idea what's going on here.

"Hey!"

I call out.

"One of you, wake up!"

"What's your name?"

the computer asks.

"One of you humans, wake up, please."

"Incorrect,"

the computer says.

My crotch hurts so bad I have to laugh.

It's just so absurd.

Plus, the endorphins are kicking in and making me giddy.

I look back at the catheter by my bunk.

I shake my head in awe.

That thing went through my urethra.

Wow.

And it did some damage on the way out.

A little streak of blood sits on the ground.

It's just a thin red line of- - I sipped my coffee, popped the last fragment of toast into my mouth, and signaled the waitress for my check.

I could have saved money by eating breakfast at home instead of going to a diner every morning.

Probably would have been a good idea, considering my meager salary.

But I hate cooking and I love eggs and bacon.

The waitress nodded and walked over to the cash register to ring me up.

But another customer came in to be seated right that moment.

I checked my watch.

Just past seven ..

No rush.

I liked to get in to work by seven-twenty so I could have time to prep for the day.

But I didn't actually need to be there until eight.

I pulled out my phone and checked my email.

TO: Astronomy Curiosities astrocurious@scilists.org FROM: (Irina Petrova, PhD) ipetrova@gaoran.ru SUBJECT: The Thin Red Line I frowned at the screen.

I thought I'd unsubscribed from that list.

I left that life a long time ago.

It didn't get a lot of volume, and what it did get, if memory served, was usually pretty interesting.

Just a bunch of astronomers, astrophysicists, and other domain experts chatting about anything that struck them as odd.

I glanced at the waitress-the customers had a bunch of questions about the menu.

Probably asking if Sally's Diner served gluten-free vegan grass clippings or something.

The good people of San Francisco could be trying at times.

With nothing better to do, I read the email.

Hello, professionals.

My name is Doctor Irina Petrova and I work at the Pulkovo Observatory in St.

Petersburg, Russia.

I am writing to you to ask for help.

For the past two years, I have been working on a theory related to infrared emissions from nebulae.

As a result, I have made detailed observations in a few specific IR bands of light.

And I have found something odd-not in any nebula, but here in our own solar system.

There is a very faint, but detectable line in the solar system that emits infrared light at the 25.984 micron wavelength.

It seems to be solely that wavelength with no variance.

Attached are Excel spreadsheets with my data.

I have also provided a few renders of the data as a 3-D model.

You will see on the model that the line is a lopsided arc that rises straight up from the sun's North Pole for 37 million kilometers.

From there, it angles sharply down and away from the sun, toward Venus.

After the arc's apex, the cloud widens like a funnel.

At Venus, the arc's cross-section is as wide as the planet itself.

The infrared glow is very faint.

I was only able to detect it at all because I was using extremely sensitive detection equipment while searching for IR emissions from nebulae.

But to be certain, I called in a favor from the Atacama observatory in Chile-in my opinion the best IR observatory in the world.

They confirmed my findings.

There are many reasons one might see IR light in interplanetary space.

It could be space dust or other particles reflecting sunlight.

Or some molecular compound could be absorbing energy and re-emitting it in the infrared band.

That would even explain why it's all the same wavelength.

The shape of the arc is of particular interest.

My first guess was that it is a collection of particles moving along magnetic field lines.

But Venus has no magnetic field to speak of.

No magnetosphere, no ionosphere, nothing.

What forces would make particles arc toward it?

And why would they glow?

Any suggestions or theories would be welcome.

- What the heck was that?

I remembered it all at once.

It just kind of showed up in my head without warning.

I didn't learn much about myself.

I live in San Francisco-I remember that.

And I like breakfast.

Also I used to be into astronomy but now I'm not?

Apparently my brain decided it was critical that I remember that email.

Not trivial things like my own name.

My subconscious wants to tell me something.

Seeing the line of blood must have reminded me of the "Thin Red Line"

title of that email.

But what's that got to do with me?

I shimmy out from under the bed and sit up against the wall.

The arms angle toward me, but still can't reach.

Time to get a look at my fellow patients.

I don't know who I am or why I'm here, but at least I'm not alone-aaaand they're dead.

Yes, definitely dead.

The one closest to me was a woman, I think.

At least, she had long hair.

Other than that, she's mostly a mummy.

Desiccated skin draped over bones.

There's no smell.

Nothing is actively rotting.

She must have died a long time ago.

The person in the other bed was a man.

I think he's been dead even longer.

His skin is not only dry and leathery but also crumbling away.

Okay.

So I'm here with two dead people.

I should be disgusted and horrified, but I'm not.

They're so far gone they don't even look human.

They look like Halloween decorations.

I hope I wasn't close friends with either of them.

Or, if I was, I hope I don't remember it.

Dead people is a concern, but I'm more concerned that they've been here so long.

Even a quarantine area would remove dead people, wouldn't they?

Whatever's wrong must be pretty darn bad.

I get to my feet.

It's slow and it takes a lot of effort.

I steady myself at the edge of Ms.

Mummy's bed.

It wobbles and I wobble with it, but I stay upright.

The robot arms make a play for me, but I flatten myself against the wall again.

I'm pretty sure I was in a coma.

Yeah.

The more I think of it, I was definitely in a coma.

I don't know how long I've been here, but if I was put here at the same time as my roommates it's been a while.

I rub my half- shaved face.

Those arms are designed to manage long-term unconsciousness.

More evidence I was in a coma.

Maybe I can get to that hatch?

I take a step.

Then another.

Then I sink to the floor.

It's just too much for me.

I have to rest.

Why am I so weak when I have these well-toned muscles?

And if I was in a coma, why do I even have muscles?

I should be a withered, spindly mess right now, not beach-bod buff.

I have no idea what my endgame is.

What should I do?

Am I really sick?

I mean, I feel like crud of course, but I don't feel "sick."

I'm not nauseated.

I don't have a headache.

I don't think I have a fever.

If I don't have a disease, why was I in a coma?

Physical injury?

I feel around my head.

No lumps or scars or bandages.

The rest of my body seems pretty solid too.

Better than solid.

I'm ripped.

I want to nod off but I resist it.

Time to take another stab at this.

I push myself back up.

It's like weightlifting.

But it's a little easier this time.

I'm recovering more and more (I hope).

I shuffle along the wall, using my back for support as much as my feet.

The arms constantly reach for me but I stay out of range.

I pant and wheeze.

I feel like I've run a marathon.

Maybe I have a lung infection?

Maybe I'm in isolation for my own protection?

I finally make it to the ladder.

I stumble forward and grab one of the rungs.

I'm just so weak.

How am I going to climb a 10- foot ladder?

Ten-foot ladder.

I think in imperial units.

That's a clue.

I'm probably an American.

Or English.

Or maybe Canadian.

Canadians use feet and inches for short distances.

I ask myself: How far is it from L.A.

to New York?

My gut answer: 3,000 miles.

A Canadian would have used kilometers.

So I'm English or American.

Or I'm from Liberia.

I know Liberia uses imperial units but I don't know my own name.

That's irritating.

I take a deep breath.

I hang on to the ladder with both hands and put my foot on the bottom rung.

I pull myself up.

It's a shaky process, but I get it done.

Both feet are on the lower rung now.

I reach up and grab the next rung.

Okay, making progress.

I feel like my whole body is made of lead-everything is so much effort.

I try to pull myself up, but my hand just isn't strong enough.

I fall backward off the ladder.

This is going to hurt.

It doesn't hurt.

The robot arms catch me before I hit the ground because I fell into grabbing range.

They don't miss a beat.

They return me to bed and settle me in like a mother putting her child to sleep.

You know what?

This is fine.

I'm really tired at this point and lying down kind of works for me.

The gentle rocking of the bed is comforting.

Something bugs me about how I fell off the ladder.

I replay it in my head.

I can't put my finger on it, but there's just a..."wrongness"

to it.

Hmm.

I drift off.

- "Eat."

There's a toothpaste tube on my chest.

"Huh?"

"Eat,"

the computer says again.

I lift the tube.

It's white with black text that reads 1- 1.

"The heck is this?"

I say.

"Eat."

I unscrew the cap and smell something savory.

My mouth waters at the prospect.

Only now do I realize how hungry I am.

I squeeze the tube and disgusting-looking brown sludge comes out.

"Eat."

Who am I to question a creepy robot-armed computer overlord?

I cautiously lick the substance.

Oh my God it's good!

It's so good!

It's like thick gravy but not too rich.

I squeeze more straight into my mouth and savor it.

I swear it's better than sex.

I know what's going on here.

They say hunger is the greatest seasoning.

When you're starving, your brain rewards you handsomely for finally eating.

Good job, it says, we get to not die for a while!

The pieces fall into place.

If I was in a coma for a long time, I must have been getting fed.

I didn't have an abdominal tube when I woke up, so it was probably feeding me with an NG tube running down my esophagus.

It's the least-intrusive way to feed a patient who can't eat but has no digestion issues.

Plus, it keeps the digestive system active and healthy.

And it explains why the tube wasn't around when I woke up.

If possible, you should remove an NG tube while the patient is still unconscious.

Why do I know that?

Am I a doctor?

I squeeze another shot of gravy-goo into my mouth.

Still delicious.

I gobble it down.

Soon the tube is empty.

I hold it up.

"More of this!"

"Meal complete."

"I'm still hungry!

Give me another tube!"

"Food allotment for this meal has been met."

It makes sense.

My digestive system is getting used to semi- solid food right now.

Best to take it easy.

If I eat as much as I want I'll probably get sick.

The computer is doing the right thing.

"Give me more food!"

No one cares about the right thing when they're hungry.

"Food allotment for this meal has been met."

"Bah."

Still, I feel a ton better than I did before.

The food energized me on the spot, plus I've had more rest.

I roll out of bed, ready to make a break for the wall, but the arms don't chase me.

I guess I'm allowed out of bed now that I've proven I can eat.

I look down at my naked body.

This just doesn't feel right.

I know the only other people around are dead, but still.

"Can I have some clothes?"

The computer says nothing.

"Fine.

Be that way."

I pull the sheet off the bed and wrap it around my torso a couple of times.

I pull one corner over my shoulder from behind my back and tie it to another from the front.

Instant toga.

"Self-ambulation detected,"

says the computer.

"What's your name?"

"I am Emperor Comatose.

Kneel before me."

"Incorrect."

Time to see what's up that ladder.

I'm a little unsteady, but I start walking across the room.

This is a victory in itself-I don't need wobbly beds or walls to cling to.

I'm on my own two feet.

I make it to the ladder and grab hold.

I don't need something to hang on to, but it sure makes life easier.

The hatch above looks pretty darn solid.

I assume it's airtight.

And there's every chance it's locked.

But I have to at least try.

I climb up one rung.

Tough, but doable.

Another rung.

Okay, I have the hang of this.

Slow and steady.

I make it to the hatch.

I hang on to the ladder with one hand and turn the hatch's circular crank with the other.

It actually turns!

"Holy moly!"

I say.

"Holy moly"?

Is that my go-to expression of surprise?

I mean, it's okay, I guess.

I would have expected something a little less 1950s.

What kind of weirdo am I?

I turn the crank three full rotations and hear a click.

The hatch tilts downward and I get out of the way.

It falls open, suspended by its hefty hinge.

I'm free!

Sort of.

Beyond the hatch, there's just darkness.

A little intimidating, but at least it's progress.

I reach into the new room and pull myself up to the floor.

Lights click on as soon as I enter.

Presumably the computer's doing.

The room looks to be the same size and shape as the one I left-another round room.

One large table-a lab table from the look of it-is mounted to the floor.

Three lab stools are mounted nearby.

All around the walls are pieces of lab equipment.

All of it mounted to tables or benches that are bolted to the floor.

It's like the room is ready for a catastrophic earthquake.

A ladder along the wall leads to another hatch in the ceiling.

I'm in a well-stocked laboratory.

Since when do isolation wards let patients into the lab?

And this doesn't look like a medical lab, anyway.

What the fudge is going on?!

Fudge?

Seriously?

Maybe I have young kids.

Or I'm deeply religious.

I stand to get a better look at things.

The lab has smaller equipment bolted to the table.

I see an 8000x microscope, an autoclave, a bank of test tubes, sets of supply drawers, a sample fridge, a furnace, pipettes-wait a minute.

Why do I know all those terms?

I look at the larger equipment along the walls.

Scanning electron microscope, sub-millimeter 3-D printer, 11-axis milling machine, laser interferometer, 1-cubic-meter vacuum chamber-I know what everything is.

And I know how to use it.

I'm a scientist!

Now we're getting somewhere!

Time for me to use science.

All right, genius brain: come up with something!

...I'm hungry.

You have failed me, brain.

Okay, well I have no idea why this lab is here or why I'm allowed in.

But...onward!

The hatch in the ceiling is 10 feet off the ground.

It's going to be another ladder adventure.

At least I'm stronger now.

I take a few deep breaths and start climbing the ladder.

Same as before, this simple act is a massive effort.

I may be getting better, but I'm not "well."

Good lord I'm heavy.

I make it to the top, but only just.

I situate myself on the uncomfortable bars and push on the hatch's handle.

It doesn't budge.

"To unlock hatch, state your name,"

says the computer.

"But I don't know my name!"

"Incorrect."

I smack the handle with the palm of my hand.

The handle doesn't move and now the palm of my hand hurts.

So...yeah.

Not fruitful.

This will have to wait.

Maybe I'll remember my name soon.

Or find it written somewhere.

I climb back down the ladder.

At least, that's my plan.

You'd think going down would be easier and safer than going up.

But no.

No.

Instead of gracefully descending the ladder, I put my foot on the next rung down at an awkward angle, lose my grip on the hatch handle, and fall like an idiot.

I flail like an angry cat, reaching out for anything I can grasp.

Turns out that's a terrible idea.

I fall onto the table and smack a set of supply drawers with my shin.

It hurts like a motherfluffer!

I cry out, grab my shin in pain, accidentally roll off the table, and fall to the floor.

No robot arms to catch me this time.

I land on my back and it knocks the wind out of me.

Then, adding insult to injury, the supply-drawer unit falls over, the drawers open, and lab supplies rain down upon me.

The cotton swabs aren't a problem.

The test tubes just kind of hurt a little (and surprisingly don't shatter).

But the tape measure smacks me square in the forehead.

More stuff clatters down, but I'm too busy holding the growing welt on my forehead to notice.

How heavy is that tape measure?

A 3-foot fall off a table left a bump on my head.

"That.

Did not work,"

I say to no one.

That whole experience was just ridiculous.

Like something out of a Charlie Chaplin movie.

Actually...it really was like that.

A little too much like that.

That same feeling of "wrongness"

strikes me.

I grab a nearby test tube and toss it into the air.

It goes up and comes down like it should.

But it annoys me.

Something about falling objects ticks me off right now.

I want to know why.

What do I have to work with?

Well, I have an entire laboratory and I know how to use it.

But what's readily at hand?

I look around at all the junk that fell to the floor.

A bunch of test tubes, sample swabs, Popsicle sticks, a digital stopwatch, pipettes, some Scotch tape, a pen...

Okay, I may have what I need here.

I get back to my feet and dust off my toga.

There's no dust on it-my whole world seems really clean and sterile, but I do the motions just the same.

I pick up the tape measure and take a look.

It's metric.

Maybe I'm in Europe?

Whatever.

Then I grab the stopwatch.

It's pretty sturdy, like something you'd take on a hike.

It has a solid plastic shell with a hard rubber ring around it.

Undoubtedly waterproof.

But also dead as a doornail.

The LCD screen is completely blank.

I press a few buttons, but nothing happens.

I turn it over to get a look at the battery compartment.

Maybe I can find a drawer with batteries in it if I know what kind it needs.

I spot a little red plastic ribbon coming out of the back.

I give it a pull and it comes out entirely.

The stopwatch beeps to life.

Kind of like "batteries included"

toys.

The little plastic tab was there to keep the battery from running down before the owner uses it for the first time.

Okay, this is a brand-spanking- new stopwatch.

Honestly, everything in this lab looks brand- new.

Clean, tidy, no signs of wear.

Not sure what to make of that.

I play with the stopwatch for a while until I understand the controls.

Pretty simple, really.

I use the tape measure to find out how high the table is.

Anyway, the table's underside is 91 centimeters from the floor.

I pick up a test tube.

It's not glass.

It may be some kind of high-density plastic or something.

It certainly didn't break when it fell 3 feet to a hard surface.

Anyway, whatever it's made of, it's dense enough for air resistance to be negligible.

I lay it on the table and ready the stopwatch.

I push the test tube off the table with one hand and start the stopwatch with the other.

I time how long it takes to hit the ground.

I get about 0.37 seconds.

That's pretty darn fast.

I hope my own reaction time isn't skewing the results.

I note the time down on my arm with the pen-I haven't found any paper yet.

I put the test tube back and repeat the test.

This time I get 0.33.

I do it twenty times total, noting the results, to minimize the effects of my error margin in starting and stopping the timer.

Anyway, I end up with an average of 0.348 seconds.

My arm looks like a math teacher's chalkboard, but that's okay.

0.348 seconds.

Distance equals one-half acceleration times time squared.

So acceleration equals two times distance over time squared.

These formulas come easily to me.

Second nature.

I'm definitely skilled at physics.

Good to know.

I run the numbers and come up with an answer I don't like.

The gravity in this room is too high.

It's 15 meters per second per second when it should be 9.8.

That's why things falling "feel"

wrong to me.

They're falling too fast.

And that's why I'm so weak despite these muscles.

Everything weighs one and a half times as much as it should.

Thing is, nothing affects gravity.

You can't increase or decrease it.

Earth's gravity is 9.8 meters per second per second.

Period.

And I'm experiencing more than that.

There's only one possible explanation.

I'm not on Earth.

O kay, take a breath.

Let's not jump to wild conclusions.

Yes, the gravity is too high.

Work from there and think of sensible answers.

I could be in a centrifuge.

It would have to be pretty big.

But with Earth's gravity providing 1 g, you could have these rooms at an angle running around a track or on the end of a long solid arm or something.

Set that spinning and the aggregate centripetal force plus Earth's gravity could be 15 meters per second per second.

Why would someone make a huge centrifuge with hospital beds and a lab in it?

I don't know.

Would it even be possible?

How big would that radius have to be?

And how fast would it go?

I think I know how to find out.

I need an accurate accelerometer.

Dropping things off a table and timing them is all well and fine for rough estimates, but it's only as accurate as my reaction time on hitting the stopwatch.

I need something better.

And only one thing will do the job: a small piece of string.

I search the lab drawers.

After a few minutes, I have half the drawers open and have found just about every form of lab supplies except string.

I'm about to give up when I finally find a spool of nylon thread.

"Yes!"

I pull off a few feet of thread and cut it with my teeth.

I tie a loop on one end and tie the other end around the tape measure.

The tape measure will be playing the role of "dead weight"

in this experiment.

Now I just need something to hang it from.

I look above me at the hatch over my head.

I climb up the ladder (easier now than ever before) and put the loop over the main latch handle.

Then I let the tape measure's weight pull the string taut.

I have a pendulum.

Cool thing about pendulums: The time it takes for one to swing forward and backward-the period-won't change, no matter how wide it swings.

If it's got a lot of energy, it'll swing farther and faster, but the period will still be the same.

This is what mechanical clocks take advantage of to keep time.

That period ends up being driven by two things, and two things only: the length of the pendulum and gravity.

I pull the pendulum to one side.

I release it and start the timer.

I count cycles as it sways back and forth.

It's not exciting.

I almost want to fall asleep, but I stay at it.

When I hit the ten-minute mark, the pendulum is barely moving anymore, so I decide that's long enough.

Grand total: 346 full cycles in exactly ten minutes.

Onward to phase two.

I measure the distance from the hatch handle to the floor.

It's just over two and a half meters.

I go back downstairs to the "bedroom."

Again, the ladder is no problem.

I'm feeling so much better now.

That food really did the trick.

"What's your name?"

the computer asks.

I look down at my sheet toga.

"I am the great philosopher Pendulus!"

"Incorrect."

I hang the pendulum on one of the robot hands near the ceiling.

I hope it'll stay still for a while.

I eyeball the distance between the robot hand and the ceiling-I'll call it a meter.

My pendulum is now four and a half meters lower than it was before.

I repeat the experiment.

Ten minutes on the stopwatch, and I count the total cycles.

The result: 346 cycles.

Same as upstairs.

Golly.

Thing is, in a centrifuge, the farther you get from the center, the higher the centripetal force will be.

So if I were in a centrifuge, the "gravity"

down here would be higher than it was upstairs.

And it isn't.

At least, not enough to get a different number of pendulum cycles.

But what if I'm in a really big centrifuge?

One so huge that the force difference between here and the lab is so small it doesn't change the number of cycles?

Let's see...the formula for a pendulum...and the formula for the force of a centrifuge...wait, I don't have the actual force, just a cycle count, so there's a one-over-x factor involved...this is actually a very instructive problem!

I have a pen, but no paper.

That's okay-I have a wall.

After a lot of "crazy prisoner scribbling on a wall"type stuff, I have my answer.

Let's say I'm on Earth and in a centrifuge.

That would mean the centrifuge provides some of the force with the rest being supplied by Earth.

According to my math (and I showed all my work!), that centrifuge would need a 700-meter radius (which is almost half a mile) and would be spinning at 88 meters per second-almost 200 miles per hour!

Hmm.

I think mostly in metric when doing science stuff.

Interesting.

Most scientists do, though, right?

Even scientists who grew up in America.

Anyway, that would be the largest centrifuge ever built...and why would anyone build it?

Plus, something like that would be loud as heck.

Whizzing through the air at 200 miles per hour?

At the very least there'd be some turbulence here and there, not to mention a lot of wind noise.

I don't hear or feel anything like that.

This is getting weird.

Okay, what if I'm in space?

There wouldn't be turbulence or wind resistance, but the centrifuge would have to be bigger and faster because there's no gravity to help out.

More math, more graffiti on the wall.

The radius would have to be 1,280 meters-close to a mile.

Nothing anywhere near that big has ever been built for space.

So I'm not in a centrifuge.

And I'm not on Earth.

Another planet?

But there isn't any planet, moon, or asteroid in the solar system that has this much gravity.

Earth is the largest solid object in the whole system.

Sure, the gas giants are bigger, but unless I'm in a balloon floating around the winds of Jupiter, there's just nowhere I could go to experience this force.

How do I know all that space stuff?

I just know it.

It feels like second nature-information I use all the time.

Maybe I'm an astronomer or a planetary scientist.

Maybe I work for NASA or ESA or- - I met Marissa every Thursday night for steak and beer at Murphy's on Gough Street.

Always at six .., and because the staff knew us, always at the same table.

We'd met almost twenty years ago in grad school.

She dated my then-roommate.

Their relationship (like most in grad school) was a train wreck and they broke up within three months.

But she and I ended up becoming good friends.

When the host saw me, he smiled and jerked his thumb toward the usual table.

I made my way through the kitschy dcor to Marissa.

She had a couple of empty lowball glasses in front of her and a full one in her hand.

Apparently, she'd gotten started early.

"Pre-gaming, eh?"

I said, sitting down.

She looked down and fidgeted with her glass.

"Hey, what's wrong?"

She took a sip of whiskey.

"Rough day at work."

I signaled the waiter.

He nodded and didn't even come over.

He knew I wanted a rib-eye, medium, mashed potatoes on the side, and a pint of Guinness.

Same thing I ordered every week.

"How rough could it be?"

I asked.

"Cushy government job with the DOE.

You probably get, what, twenty days off a year?

All you have to do is show up and you get paid, right?"

Again, no laugh.

Nothing.

"Oh, come on!"

I said.

"Who pooped in your Rice Krispies?"

She sighed.

"You know about the Petrova line?"

"Sure.

Kind of an interesting mystery.

My guess is solar radiation.

Venus doesn't have a magnetic field, but positively charged particles might be drawn there because it's electrically neutral-"

"No,"

she said.

"It's something else.

We don't know exactly what.

But it's something...else.

But whatever.

Let's eat steak."

I snorted.

"Come on, Marissa, spill it.

What the heck is wrong with you?"

She mulled it over.

"Why not?

You'll hear it from the president in about twelve hours anyway."

"The president?"

I said.

"Of the United States?"

She took another gulp of whiskey.

"Have you heard of Amaterasu?

It's a Japanese solar probe."

"Sure,"

I said.

"JAXA has been getting some great data from it.

It's really neat, actually.

It's in a solar orbit, about halfway between Mercury and Venus.

It has twenty different instruments aboard that-"

"Yeah, I know.

Whatever,"

she said.

"According to their data, the sun's output is decreasing."

I shrugged.

"So?

Where are we in the solar cycle?"

She shook her head.

"It's not the eleven-year cycle.

It's something else.

JAXA accounted for the cycle.

There's still a downward trend.

They say the sun is 0.01 percent less bright than it should be."

"Okay, interesting.

But hardly worth three whiskeys before dinner."

She pursed her lips.

"That's what I thought.

But they're saying that value is increasing.

And the rate of the increase is increasing.

It's some sort of exponential loss that they caught very, very early thanks to their probe's incredibly sensitive instruments."

I leaned back in the booth.

"I don't know, Marissa.

Spotting an exponential progression that early seems really unlikely.

But okay, let's say the JAXA scientists are right.

Where's the energy going?"

"The Petrova line."

"Huh?"

"JAXA took a good long look at the Petrova line and they say it's getting brighter at the same rate that the sun is getting dimmer.

Somehow or another, whatever it is, the Petrova line is stealing energy from the sun."

She pulled a sheaf of papers from her purse and put them on the table.

It looked like a bunch of graphs and charts.

She shuffled through them until she found the one she wanted, then pushed it toward me.

The x-axis was labeled "time"

and the y-axis was labeled "luminosity loss."

The line was exponential, for sure.

"This can't be right,"

I said.

"It's right,"

she said.

"The sun's output will drop a full percent over the next nine years.

In twenty years that figure will be five percent.

This is bad.

It's really bad."

I stared at the graph.

"That would mean an ice age.

Like...

right away.

Instant ice age."

"Yeah, at the very least.

And crop failures, mass starvation...I don't even know what else."

I shook my head.

"How can there be a sudden change in the sun?

It's a star, for cripes' sake.

Things just don't happen this fast for stars.

Changes take millions of years, not dozens.

Come on, you know that."

"No, I don't know that.

I used to know that.

Now I only know the sun's dying,"

she said.

"I don't know why and I don't know what we could do about it.

But I know it's dying."

"How..."

I furrowed my brow.

She downed the rest of her drink.

"President addresses the nation tomorrow morning.

I think they're coordinating with other world leaders to all announce at the same time."

The waiter dropped off my Guinness.

"Here you go, sir.

The steaks should be out shortly."

"I need another whiskey,"

Marissa said.

"Make it two,"

I added.

- I blink.

Another flash of memory.

Was it true?

Or is that just a random memory of me talking to someone who got sucked into a bogus doomsday theory?

No.

It's real.

I'm terrified just thinking about it.

And it's not just sudden terror.

It's a cozy, comfortable terror with a permanent seat at the table.

I've felt it for a long time.

This is real.

The sun is dying.

And I'm tangled up in it.

Not just as a fellow citizen of Earth who will die with everyone else -I'm actively involved.

There's a sense of responsibility there.

I still don't remember my own name, but I remember random bits of information about the Petrova problem.

They call it the Petrova problem.

I just remembered that.

My subconscious has priorities.

And it's desperately telling me about this.

I think my job is to solve the Petrova problem.

...in a small lab, wearing a bedsheet toga, with no idea who I am, and no help other than a mindless computer and two mummified roommates.

My vision blurs.

I wipe my eyes.

Tears.

I can't...I can't remember their names.

But...they were my friends.

My comrades.

Only now do I realize I've been facing away from them the whole time.

I've done everything I can to keep them out of my line of sight.

Scrawling on the wall like a madman with the corpses of people I cared about right behind me.

But now the distraction is over.

I turn to look at them.

I sob.

It comes without warning.

I remember bits and pieces all in a rush.

She was funny-always quick with a joke.

He was professional and with nerves of steel.

I think he was military and he was definitely our leader.

I fall to the floor and put my head in my hands.

I can't hold anything back.

I cry like a child.

We were a lot more than friends.

And "team"

isn't the right word either.

It's stronger than that.

It's...

It's on the tip of my tongue...

Finally, the word slides into my conscious mind.

It had to wait until I wasn't looking to sneak in.

Crew.

We were a crew.

And I'm all that's left.

This is a spacecraft.

I know that now.

I don't know how it has gravity but it's a spaceship.

Things start to fall into place.

We weren't sick.

We were in suspended animation.

But these beds aren't magical "freeze chambers"

like in the movies.

There's no special technology at play here.

I think we were in medically induced comas.

Feeding tubes, IVs, constant medical care.

Everything a body needs.

Those arms probably changed sheets, kept us rotated to prevent bedsores, and did all the other things ICU nurses would normally do.

And we were kept fit.

Electrodes all over our bodies to stimulate muscle movement.

Lots of exercise.

But in the end, comas are dangerous.

Extremely dangerous.

Only I survived, and my brain is a pile of mush.

I walk over to the woman.

I actually feel better, looking at her.

Maybe it's a sense of closure, or maybe it's just the calmness that comes after a crying jag.

The mummy has no tubes attached.

No monitoring equipment at all.

There's a small hole in her leathery wrist.

That's where the IV was when she died, I guess.

So the hole never healed.

The computer must have removed everything when she died.

Waste not, want not, I guess.

No point in using resources on dead people.

More for the survivors.

More for me, in other words.

I take a deep breath and let it out.

I have to be calm.

I have to think clearly.

I remembered a lot just then-my crew, some aspects of their personalities, that I'm on a spaceship (I'll freak out about that later).

The point is I'm getting more memories back, and they're coming sort of when I want them instead of at random intervals.

I want to focus on that, but the sadness is just so strong.

"Eat,"

says the computer.

A panel in the center of the ceiling opens up, and a food tube drops out.

One of the robot arms catches it and places it on my bed.

The label reads 1- 2.

I'm not in the mood to eat, but my stomach growls as soon as I see the tube.

Whatever my mental state may be, my body has needs.

I open the tube and squirt goop into my mouth.

I have to admit: It's another incredible flavor sensation.

I think it's chicken with hints of vegetable.

There's no texture, of course-it's basically baby food.

And it's a little thicker than my earlier meal.

It's all about getting my digestive system used to solid food again.

"Water?"

I say between mouthfuls.

The ceiling panel opens again, this time with a metal cylinder.

An arm brings it to me.

Text on the shiny container reads .

I unscrew the top and, sure enough, there's water in there.

I take a sip.

It's room temperature and tastes flat.

It's probably distilled and devoid of minerals.

But water's water.

I finish the rest of my meal.

I haven't had to use a bathroom yet but I'll need to eventually.

I'd rather not go wee on the floor.

"Toilet?"

I say.

A wall panel spins around to reveal a metal commode.

It's just right there in the wall, like in a prison cell.

I take a closer look.

It has buttons and stuff on it.

I think there's a vacuum pipe in the bowl.

And there's no water.

I think this might be a zero-g toilet modified for use in gravity.

Why do that?

"Okay, uh...dismiss toilet."

The wall swivels around again.

The toilet is gone.

All right.

I'm well fed.

I'm feeling a little better about things.

Food will do that.

I need to focus on some positives.

I'm alive.

Whatever killed my friends, it didn't kill me.

I'm on a spaceship-I don't know the details, but I know I'm on a ship and it seems to be working correctly.

And my mental state is improving.

I'm sure of it.

I sit cross-legged on the floor.

It's time for a proactive step.

I close my eyes and let my mind wander.

I want to remember something-anything-on purpose.

I don't care what.

But I want to initiate it.

Let's see what I get.

I start with what makes me happy.

I like science.

I know it.

I got a thrill from all the little experiments I've been doing.

And I'm in space.

So maybe I can think about space and science and see what I get....

- I pulled the piping-hot spaghetti TV dinner from the microwave and hustled over to my couch.

I peeled the plastic off the top to let the steam escape.

I unmuted the TV and listened to the live feed.

Several coworkers and a few friends had invited me to watch this with them, but I didn't want to spend the whole evening answering questions.

I just wanted to watch in peace.

It was the most watched event in human history.

More than the moon landing.

More than any World Cup Final.

Every network, streaming service, news website, and local TV affiliate was showing the same thing: NASA's live feed.

A reporter stood with an older man in the gallery of a flight- control room.

Beyond them, men and women in blue shirts fixed their attention on their terminals.

"This is Sandra Elias,"

said the reporter.

"I'm here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California.

I'm here with Dr.

Browne, who is the head of Planetary Sciences for NASA."

She turned to the scientist.

"Doctor, what's our status now?"

Browne cleared his throat.

"We received confirmation about ninety minutes ago that ArcLight successfully inserted into orbit around Venus.

Now we're just waiting for that first batch of data."

It had been a heck of a year since the JAXA announcement about the Petrova problem.

But study after study confirmed their findings.

The clock was ticking and the world needed to find out what was going on.

So Project ArcLight was born.

The situation was terrifying, but the project itself was awesome.

My inner nerd couldn't help but be excited.

ArcLight was the most expensive unmanned spacecraft ever built.

The world needed answers and didn't have time to dillydally.

Normally if you asked a space agency to send a probe to Venus in under a year, they'd laugh in your face.

But it's amazing what you can do with an unlimited budget.

The United States, European Union, Russia, China, India, and Japan all helped cover costs.

"Tell us about going to Venus,"

the reporter said.

"What makes it so hard?"

"The main problem is fuel,"

said Browne.

"There are specific transfer windows when interplanetary travel takes the minimum amount of fuel, but we were nowhere near an Earth-Venus window.

So we had to put a lot more fuel in orbit just to get ArcLight there in the first place."

"So it's a case of bad timing, then?"

the reporter asked.

"I don't think there's ever a good time for the sun to get dimmer."

"Good point.

Please go on."

"Venus moves very fast compared to Earth, which means more fuel just to catch up.

Even under ideal conditions, it actually takes more fuel to get to Venus than it does to get to Mars."

"Amazing.

Amazing.

Now, Doctor, some people have asked, 'Why bother with the planet?

The Petrova line is huge, spanning an arc from the sun to Venus.

Why not somewhere between?' "

"Because the Petrova line is widest there-as wide as the whole planet.

And we can use the planet's gravity to help us out.

ArcLight will actually orbit Venus twelve times while collecting samples of whatever material the Petrova line is made of."

"And what is that material, you think?"

"We have no idea,"

said Browne.

"No idea at all.

But we might have answers soon.

Once ArcLight finishes this first orbit, it should have enough material for its onboard analysis lab."

"And what can we expect to learn tonight?"

"Not much.

The onboard lab is pretty basic.

Just a high- magnification microscope and an x-ray spectrometer.

The real mission here is sample return.

It'll be another three months for ArcLight to come home with those samples.

The lab is a backup to get at least some data in case there's a failure during the return phase."

"Good planning as always, Dr.

Browne."

"It's what we do."

A cheer erupted from behind the reporter.

"I'm hearing-"

She paused to let the sound die down.

"I'm hearing that the first orbit is complete and the data is coming in now...."

The main screen in the control room changed to a black-and- white image.

The picture was mostly gray, with black dots scattered here and there.

"What are we looking at, Doctor?"

said the reporter's voice.

"This is from the internal microscope,"

said Browne.

"It's magnified ten thousand times.

Those black dots are about ten microns across."

"Are those dots what we've been looking for?"

she asked.

"We can't be certain,"

said Browne.

"They could just be dust particles.

Any major gravity source like a planet will have a cloud of dust surrounding-"

"What the fuck?!"

came a voice in the background.

Several flight controllers gasped.

The reporter snickered.

"High spirits here at JPL.

We are coming to you live, so we apologize for any-"

"Oh my God!"

said Browne.

On the main screen, more images came through.

One after another.

All nearly the same.

Nearly.

The reporter looked at the images on-screen.

"Are those particles...moving?"

The images, playing in succession, showed the black dots deforming and shifting around within their environment.

The reporter cleared her throat and delivered what many would call the understatement of the century: "They look a little like microbes, wouldn't you say?"

"Telemetry!"

Dr.

Browne called out.

"Any shimmy in the probe?"

"Already checked,"

said someone.

"No shimmy."

"Is there a consistent direction of travel?"

he asked.

"Something that could be explained by an external force?

Magnetic, maybe?

Static electricity?"

The room fell silent.

"Anyone?!"

said Browne.

I dropped my fork right into my spaghetti.

Is this actually alien life?

Am I really that lucky?!

To be alive when humanity first discovers extraterrestrial life?!

Wow!

I mean-the Petrova problem is still terrifying but...

wow!

Aliens!

This could be aliens!

I couldn't wait to talk about this with the kids tomorrow- - "Angular anomaly,"

the computer says.

"Darn it!"

I say.

"I was almost there!

I almost remembered myself!"

"Angular anomaly,"

the computer repeats.

I unfold myself and get to my feet.

In my limited interactions with it, the computer seems to have some understanding of what I say.

Like Siri or Alexa.

So I'll talk to it like I'd talk to one of them.

"Computer, what is an angular anomaly?"

"Angular anomaly: an object or body designated as critical is not at the expected location angle by at least 0.01 radians."

"What body is anomalous?"

"Angular anomaly."

Not much help.

I'm on a ship, so it must be a navigational issue.

That can't be good.

How would I even steer this thing?

I don't see anything resembling spaceship controls-not that I really know what those look like.

But all I've discovered so far is a "coma room"

and a lab.

That other hatch in the lab-the one that leads farther up- that must be important.

This is like being in a video game.

Explore the area until you find a locked door, then look for the key.

But instead of searching bookshelves and garbage cans, I have to search my mind.

Because the "key"

is my own name.

The computer's not being unreasonable.

If I can't remember my own name, I probably shouldn't be allowed into delicate areas of the ship.

I climb onto my bunk and lie on my back.

I keep a wary eye on the robot arms above, but they don't move.

I guess the computer is satisfied that I'm self-sufficient for now.

I close my eyes and focus on that flash of memory.

I can see bits and pieces of it in my mind.

Like looking at an old photo that's been damaged.

I'm in my house...no...apartment.

I have an apartment.

It's tidy, but small.

There's a picture of the San Francisco skyline on one wall.

Not useful.

I already know I lived in San Francisco.

There's a Lean Cuisine microwave meal on the coffee table in front of me.

Spaghetti.

The heat still hasn't equalized yet, so there are pockets of nearly frozen noodles next to tongue- melting plasma.

But I'm taking bites anyway.

I must be hungry.

I'm watching NASA on TV; I see all that stuff from my previous flash of memory.

My first thought is...I'm elated!

Could it be extraterrestrial life?

I can't wait to tell the kids!

I have kids?

This is a single man's apartment with a single man eating a single man's meal.

I don't see anything feminine at all.

There's nothing to suggest a woman in my life.

Am I divorced?

Gay?

Either way, there's no sign that children live here.

No toys, no pictures of kids on the wall or mantel, nothing.

And the place is way too clean.

Kids make a mess of everything.

Especially when they start chewing gum.

They all go through a gum phase-at least, a lot of them do-and they leave it everywhere.

How do I know that?

I like kids.

Huh.

Just a feeling.

But I like them.

They're cool.

They're fun to hang out with.

So I'm a single man in my thirties, who lives alone in a small apartment, I don't have any kids, but I like kids a lot.

I don't like where this is going...

A teacher!

I'm a schoolteacher!

I remember it now!

Oh, thank God.

I'm a teacher.

"A ll right,"

I said, looking at the clock.

"We have one minute until the bell.

You know what that means!"

"Lightning round!"

yelled my students.

Life had changed surprisingly little since the announcement about the Petrova line.

The situation was dire and deadly, but it was also the norm.

Londoners during the Blitz in World War II went about their day as normal, with the understanding that occasionally buildings get blown up.

However desperate things were, someone still had to deliver milk.

And if Mrs.

McCreedy's house got bombed in the night, well, you crossed it off the delivery list.

So it was that with the apocalypse looming-possibly caused by an alien life-form-I stood in front of a bunch of kids and taught them basic science.

Because what's the point of even having a world if you're not going to pass it on to the next generation?

The kids sat in neat rows of desks, facing the front.

Pretty standard stuff.

But the rest of the room was like a mad scientist's lab.

I'd spent years perfecting the look.

I had a Jacob's ladder in one corner (I kept it unplugged so the kids didn't kill themselves).

Along another wall was a bookshelf full of specimen jars of animal parts in formaldehyde.

One of the jars was just spaghetti and a boiled egg.

The kids speculated on that one a lot.

And gracing the center of the ceiling was my pride and joy- a huge mobile that was a model of the solar system.

Jupiter was the size of a basketball, while wee Mercury was as small as a marble.

It had taken me years to cultivate a rep as the "cool"

teacher.

Kids are smarter than most people think.

And they can tell when a teacher actually cares about them as opposed to when they're just going through the motions.

Anyway, it was time for the lightning round!

I grabbed a fistful of beanbags off my desk.

"What is the actual name of the North Star?"

"Polaris!"

said Jeff.

"Correct!"

I threw a beanbag to him.

Before he even caught it, I fired off the next question.

"What are the three basic kinds of rocks?"

"Igneous, sedentary, and metamorphic!"

yelled Larry.

He was excitable, to say the least.

"So close!"

I said.

"Igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic,"

said Abby with a sneer.

Pain in the ass, that one.

But smart as a whip.

"Yes!"

I threw her a beanbag.

"What wave do you feel first during an earthquake?"

"The P-wave,"

Abby said.

"You again?"

I threw her a beanbag.

"What's the speed of light?"

"Three times ten to-"

Abby began.

"C!"

yelled Regina from the back.

She rarely spoke up.

Good to see her coming out of her shell.

"Sneaky, but correct!"

I chucked her a beanbag.

"I was answering first!"

Abby complained.

"But she finished her answer first,"

I said.

"What's the nearest star to Earth?"

"Alpha Centauri!"

Abby said quickly.

"Wrong!"

I said.

"No, I'm not!"

"Yes, you are.

Anyone else?"

"Oh!"

Larry said.

"It's the sun!"

"Right!"

I said.

"Larry gets the beanbag!

Careful with your assumptions, Abby."

She folded her arms in a huff.

"Who can tell me the radius of Earth?"

Trang raised his hand.

"Three thousand, nine hundre-"

"Trang!"

Abby said.

"The answer is Trang."

Trang froze in confusion.

"What?"

I asked.

Abby preened.

"You asked who could tell you the radius of Earth.

Trang can tell you.

I answered correctly."

Outsmarted by a thirteen-year-old.

Wasn't the first time.

I dropped a beanbag on her desk just as the bell rang.

The kids leapt from their chairs and collected their books and backpacks.

Abby, flush with victory, took a little more time than the others.

"Remember to cash in your beanbags at the end of the week for toys and other prizes!"

I said to their retreating backs.

Soon, the classroom was empty, and only the echoing sounds of children in the hallway suggested any evidence of life.

I collected their homework assignments from my desk and slipped them into my valise.

Sixth period was over.

Time to hit the teachers' lounge for a cup of coffee.

Maybe I'd correct some papers before I headed home.

Anything to avoid the parking lot.

A fleet of helicopter moms would be descending on the school to pick up their children.

And if one of them saw me, they always had some complaint or suggestion.

I can't fault someone for loving their kids, and God knows we could do with more parents being engaged in their kids' educations, but there's a limit.

"Ryland Grace?"

said a woman's voice.

I looked up with a start.

I hadn't heard her come in.

She looked to be in her mid-forties, wearing a well-tailored business suit.

She carried a briefcase.

"Uh, yeah,"

I said.

"Can I help you with something?"

"I think you can,"

she said.

She had a slight accent.

Something European-I couldn't quite put my finger on it.

"My name is Eva Stratt.

I'm with the Petrova Taskforce."

"The what?"

"The Petrova Taskforce.

It's an international body set up to deal with the Petrova-line situation.

I've been tasked with finding a solution.

They've given me a certain amount of authority to get things done."

"They?

Who's they?"

"Every member nation of the UN."

"Wait, what?

How did-"

"Unanimous secret vote.

It's complicated.

I'd like to talk to you about a scientific paper you wrote."

"Secret vote?

Never mind."

I shook my head.

"My paper- writing days are over.

Academia didn't work well for me."

"You're a teacher.

You're still in academia."

"Well, yeah,"

I said.

"But I mean, you know, academia.

With scientists and peer review and-"

"And assholes who get you kicked out of your university?"

She raised an eyebrow.

"And who got all your funding cut off and ensured you never got published again?"

"Yeah.

That."

She pulled a binder out of her briefcase.

She opened it and read the first page.

"

'An Analysis of Water-Based Assumptions and Recalibration of Expectations for Evolutionary Models.' "

She looked up at me.

"You wrote this paper, yes?"

"I'm sorry, how did you get-"

"A dull title, but very exciting content, I have to say."

I set my valise on my desk.

"Look, I was in a bad place when I wrote that, okay?

I'd had enough of the research world and that was sort of a 'kiss-my-butt' goodbye.

I'm much happier now as a teacher."

She flipped a few pages.

"You spent years combating the assumption that life requires liquid water.

You have an entire section here called 'The Goldilocks Zone Is for Idiots.' You call out dozens of eminent scientists by name and berate them for believing a temperature range is a requirement."

"Yeah, but-"

"Your doctorate is in molecular biology, correct?

Don't most scientists agree that liquid water is necessary for life to evolve?"

"They're wrong!"

I crossed my arms.

"There's nothing magical about hydrogen and oxygen!

They're required for Earth life, sure.

But another planet could have completely different conditions.

All life needs is a chemical reaction that results in copies of the original catalyst.

And you don't need water for that!"

I closed my eyes, took a deep breath, and let it out.

"Anyway, I got mad, and I wrote that paper.

Then I got a teaching credential, a new career, and started actually enjoying my life.

So I'm glad no one believed me.

I'm better off."

"I believe you,"

she said.

"Thanks,"

I said.

"But I have papers to grade.

Can you tell me why you're here?"

She put the binder back in her briefcase.

"You are aware of the ArcLight probe and the Petrova line, I assume."

"I'd be a pretty lame science teacher if I wasn't."

"Do you think those dots are alive?"

she asked.

"I don't know-they could just be dust bouncing around in magnetic fields.

I guess we'll find out when ArcLight gets back to Earth.

That's coming up, right?

Just a few weeks from now?"

"It returns on the twenty-third,"

she said.

"Roscosmos will recover it from low-Earth orbit with a dedicated Soyuz mission."

I nodded.

"Then we'll know soon enough.

The most brilliant minds in the world will look at them and find out what they're about.

Who's going to do that?

Do you know?"

"You,"

she said.

"You're going to do it."

I stared blankly.

She waved her hand in front of my face.

"Hello?"

"You want me to look at the dots?"

I said.

"Yes."

"The whole world put you in charge of solving this problem, and you came directly to a junior high school science teacher?"

"Yes."

I turned and walked out the door.

"You're lying, insane, or a combination of the two.

I have to get going now."

"This is not optional,"

she said to my back.

"Seems optional to me!"

I waved goodbye.

Yeah.

It wasn't optional.

When I got back to my apartment, before I even got to my front door, four well-dressed men surrounded me.

They showed me their FBI badges and hustled me into one of three black SUVs parked in the complex parking lot.

After a twenty-minute drive where they refused to answer any of my questions or even speak to me at all, they parked and showed me into a generic- looking business-park building.

My feet barely touched the ground as they led me down an empty hallway with unmarked doors every 30 feet or so.

Finally, they opened a set of double doors at the end of the hall and gently nudged me inside.

Unlike the rest of the abandoned building, this room was full of furniture and shiny, high-tech devices.

It was the most well- stocked biology lab I'd ever seen.

And right in the middle of it all was Eva Stratt.

"Hello, Dr.

Grace,"

she said.

"This is your new lab."

The FBI agents closed the doors behind me, leaving Stratt and me alone in the lab.

I rubbed my shoulder where they had manhandled me a little too hard.

I looked at the door behind me.

"So...when you say 'a certain amount of authority'..."

"I have all of the authority."

"You have an accent.

Are you even from America?"

"I'm Dutch.

I was an administrator at ESA.

But that doesn't matter.

Now I'm in charge of this.

There is no time for slow, international committees.

The sun is dying.

We need a solution.

It's my job to find it."

She pulled up a lab stool and sat down.

"These 'dots' are probably a life-form.

The exponential progression of solar dimming is consistent with the exponential population growth of a typical life-form."

"You think they're...eating the sun?"

"They're eating its energy output at least,"

she said.

"Okay, that's-well, terrifying.

But regardless: What the heck do you want from me?"

"The ArcLight probe is bringing the samples back to Earth.

Some of them might still be alive.

I want you to examine them and find out what you can."

"Yeah, you mentioned that earlier,"

I said.

"But I have to believe there are more qualified people to do this than just me."

"Scientists all over the world will be looking at them, but I want you to be the first."

"Why?"

"It lives on or near the surface of the sun.

Does that sound like a water-based life-form to you?"

She was right.

Water simply can't exist at those temperatures.

After about 3,000 degrees Celsius, the hydrogen and oxygen atoms can't stay bound to each other anymore.

The surface of the sun was 5,500 degrees Celsius.

She continued.

"The field of speculative extraterrestrial biology is small-only five hundred or so people in the world.

And everyone I talk to-from Oxford professors to Tokyo University researchers-seems to agree that you could have led it if you hadn't suddenly left."

"Gosh,"

I said.

"I didn't leave on good terms.

I'm surprised they said such nice stuff about me."

"Everyone understands the gravity of the situation.

There's no time for old grudges.

But for what it's worth, you'll be able to show everyone you were right.

You don't need water for life.

Surely that must be something you want."

"Sure,"

I said.

"I mean...yeah.

But not like this."

She hopped off her stool and headed to the door.

"It is what it is.

Be here on the twenty-third at seven ..

I'll have the sample for you."

"Wha-"

I said.

"It'll be in Russia, won't it?"

"I told Roscosmos to land their Soyuz in Saskatchewan.

The Royal Canadian Air Force will recover the sample and bring it directly here to San Francisco via fighter jet.

The U.S.

will allow the Canadians use of the airspace."

"Saskatchewan?"

"Soyuz capsules are launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which is at a high latitude.

The safest landing locations are at that same latitude.

Saskatchewan is the closest large, flat area to San Francisco that meets all the requirements."

I held up my hand.

"Wait.

The Russians, Canadians, and Americans all just do whatever you tell them?"

"Yes.

Without question."

"Are you joshing me with all this?!"

"Get accommodated with your new lab, Dr.

Grace.

I have other things to deal with."

She walked out the door without another word.

- "Yes!"

I pump my fist.

I jump to my feet and climb the ladder to the lab.

Once there, I climb that ladder and grab hold of the Mystery Hatch.

Just like last time, as soon as I touch the handle, the computer says, "To unlock hatch, state your name."

"Ryland Grace,"

I say with a smug smile.

"Dr.

Ryland Grace."

A small click from the hatch is the only response I get.

After all the meditation and introspection I did to find out my own name, I wish there'd been something more exciting.

Confetti, maybe.

I grab the handle and twist.

It turns.

My domain is about to grow by at least one new room.

I push the hatch upward.

Unlike the connector between the bedroom and the lab, this hatch slides to the side.

This next room is pretty small, so I guess there wasn't room for the hatch to swing in.

And that next room is...

um...?

LED lights flick on.

The room is round, like the other two, but it's not a cylinder.

The walls taper inward toward the ceiling.

It's a truncated cone.

I've spent the last few days without much information to go on.

Now information assaults me from every direction.

Every surface is covered with computer monitors and touchscreens.

The sheer number of blinking lights and colors is staggering.

Some screens have rows of numbers, others have diagrams, and others just look black.

On the edge of the conical walls is another hatch.

This one is less mysterious, though.

It has the word stenciled across the top, and the hatch itself has a round window in it.

Through the window I can see a tiny chamber-just big enough for one person-with a spacesuit inside.

The far wall has another hatch.

Yup.

That's an airlock.

And in the center of everything is a chair.

It's perfectly positioned to be able to reach all screens and touch panels easily.

I climb the rest of the way into the room and settle into the chair.

It's comfortable, kind of a bucket seat.

"Pilot detected,"

the computer says.

"Angular anomaly."

Pilot.

Okay.

"Where is the anomaly?"

I ask.

"Angular anomaly."

HAL 9000 this computer is not.

I look around at the many screens for a clue.

The chair swivels easily, which is nice in this 360-degree computer pit.

I spot one screen with a blinking red border.

I lean in to get a better look.

ANGULAR ANOMALY: RELATIVE MOTION ERROR PREDICTED VELOCITY: 11,423 KPS MEASURED VELOCITY: 11,872 KPS STATUS: AUTO-CORRECTING TRAJECTORY.

NO ACTION REQUIRED.

Well.

That means nothing to me.

Except "kps."

That might mean "kilometers per second."

Above the text is a picture of the sun.

It's jiggling around slightly.

Maybe it's a video?

Like a live feed?

Or is that just my imagination?

On a hunch, I touch the screen with two fingers and drag them apart.

Sure enough, the image zooms in.

Just like using a smartphone.

There are a couple of sunspots on the left side of the image.

I zoom in on those until they fill the screen.

The image remains amazingly clear.

It's either an extremely high- resolution photo or an extremely high-resolution solar telescope.

I estimate the cluster of sunspots is about 1 percent the width of the disc.

Pretty normal for sunspots.

That means I'm now looking at half a degree of the sun's circumference (very rough math here).

The sun rotates about once per twenty-five days (science teachers know this sort of thing).

So it should take an hour for the spots to move off the screen.

I'll check back later and see if they have.

If so, it's a live image.

If not, it's a picture.

Hmm...11,872 kilometers per second.

Velocity is relative.

It doesn't make any sense unless you are comparing two objects.

A car on the freeway might be going 70 miles per hour compared to the ground, but compared to the car next to it, it's moving almost 0.

So what is that "measured velocity"

measuring the velocity of?

I think I know.

I'm in a spaceship, right?

I have to be.

So that value is probably my velocity.

But compared to what?

Judging by the big ol' picture of the sun over the text, I'm guessing it's the sun.

So I'm going 11,872 kilometers per second with respect to the sun.

I catch a flicker from the text below.

Did something change?

ANGULAR ANOMALY: RELATIVE MOTION ERROR PREDICTED VELOCITY: 11,422 KPS MEASURED VELOCITY: 11,871 KPS STATUS: AUTO-CORRECTING TRAJECTORY.

NO ACTION REQUIRED.

Those numbers are different!

They both went down by one.

Oh wow.

Hang on.

I pull the stopwatch from my toga (the best ancient Greek philosophers always carried stopwatches in their togas).

Then I stare at the screen for what seems like an eternity.

Just before I'm about to give up, the numbers both drop by one again.

I start the timer.

This time, I'm ready for how long the wait will be.

Again, it seems interminable, but I stand firm.

Finally, the numbers both drop again and I stop the timer.

Sixty-six seconds.

"Measured velocity"

is going down by one every sixty-six seconds.

Some quick math tells me that's an acceleration of...15 meters per second per second.

That's the same "gravity"

acceleration I worked out earlier.

The force I'm feeling isn't gravity.

And it's not a centrifuge.

I'm in a spaceship that is constantly accelerating in a line.

Well, actually it's decelerating-the values are going down.

And that velocity...it's a lot of velocity.

Yes, it's going down, but wow!

To reach Earth orbit you only need to go 8 kps.

I'm going over 11,000.

That's faster than anything in the solar system.

Anything that fast will escape the sun's gravity and go flying off into interstellar space.

The readout doesn't have anything to indicate what direction I'm going.

Just a relative velocity.

So now my question is: Am I barreling toward the sun, or away from it?

It's almost academic.

I'm either on a collision course with the sun or on my way out to deep space with no hope of returning.

Or, I might be headed in the sun's general direction, but not on a collision course.

If that's the case, I'll miss the sun...and then fly off into deep space with no hope of returning.

Well, if the image of the sun is real-time, then the sunspot will get larger or smaller on-screen as I travel.

So I just have to wait until I know if it's real-time.

That'll take about an hour.

I start the stopwatch.

I acquaint myself with the million other screens in the little room.

Most of them have something to say, but one of them just shows an image of a circular crest.

I think it's probably an idle screen or something.

If I touch it, that computer will wake up.

But that idle screen might be the most informative thing in here.

It's a mission crest.

I've seen enough NASA documentaries to know one when I see one.

The circular crest has an outer ring of blue with white text.

The text reads across the top and across the bottom.

The name and "port of call"

for this vessel.

I didn't think the ship came from somewhere other than Earth, but okay.

Anyway, I guess I finally know the name of this ship I'm on.

I'm aboard the Hail Mary.

Not sure what to do with that information.

But that's not all the crest has to tell me.

Inside the blue band, there's a black circle with weird symbols inside: a yellow circle with a dot in the middle, a blue circle with a white cross, and a smaller yellow circle with a lowercase t.

No idea what any of that is supposed to mean.

Around the edge of the black area it says: ","

","

and "."

The crew.

I'm "Grace,"

so those other two must be the names of the mummies in the bunks downstairs.

A Chinese person and a Russian person.

The memory of them is almost at the surface, but I can't quite pull it up.

I think some internal defense mechanism is suppressing it.

When I remember them, it's going to hurt, so my brain refuses to remember them.

Maybe.

I don't know-I'm a science teacher, not a trauma psychologist.

I wipe my eyes clear.

Maybe I won't push too hard for that memory just yet.

I have an hour to kill.

I let my mind wander to see what else I can remember.

It's getting easier and easier.

- "I'm not one hundred percent comfortable with all this,"

I said.

My voice was muffled by the full hazmat suit I wore.

My breath fogged up the clear vinyl face-window thingy.

"You'll be fine,"

said Stratt's voice over the intercom.

She watched from the other side of double-paned, very thick glass.

They'd made a few upgrades to the lab.

Oh, the equipment was all the same, but now the entire room was air-sealed.

The walls were lined with thick plastic sheets, all held together with some kind of special tape.

I saw CDC logos everywhere.

Quarantine protocols.

Not at all comforting.

The only entry now was through a big plastic airlock.

And they made me put on the hazmat suit before going in.

An air line led to my suit from a spool in the ceiling.

All the top-of-the-line equipment was ready for whatever I wanted to do.

I'd never seen a lab so well stocked.

And in the middle was a wheeled cart holding a cylindrical container.

Stenciled writing on the cylinder read .

Not deeply useful.

Stratt wasn't alone in the observation room.

About twenty people in military uniforms stood with her, all looking on with interest.

There were definitely some Americans, some Russians, a few Chinese officers, plus many more unique uniforms I didn't even recognize.

A large international group.

None of them said a word, and by some silent agreement, they all stayed a few feet behind Stratt.

I grabbed the air hose with my gloved hand and gestured to Stratt with it.

"Is this really necessary?"

She pressed the intercom button.

"There's a very good chance the sample in that cylinder is an alien life-form.

We're not taking any chances."

"Wait...you're not taking any chances.

But I am!"

"It's not like that."

"How is it not like that?"

She paused.

"Okay, it's exactly like that."

I walked to the cylinder.

"Did everyone else have to go through all this?"

She looked at the military people and they shrugged at her.

"What do you mean by 'everyone else'?"

"You know,"

I said.

"The people who transferred it to this container."

"That's the sample container from the capsule.

It's three centimeters of lead surrounding a shell of centimeter-thick steel.

It's been sealed since it left Venus.

It has fourteen latches you'll need to open to get to the sample itself."

I looked at the cylinder, back to her, back to the cylinder, and back to her.

"This is some bull-puckey."

"Look at the bright side,"

she said.

"You'll be forever known as the man who made first contact with extraterrestrial life."

"If it even is life,"

I mumbled.

I got the fourteen latches open with some effort.

Those things were tight.

I vaguely wondered about how the ArcLight probe closed them in the first place.

Must have been some kind of cool actuated system.

The inside wasn't impressive.

I didn't expect it to be.

Just a small, clear, plastic ball that appeared to be empty.

The mysterious dots were microscopic and there weren't very many of them.

"No radiation detected,"

Stratt said through the intercom.

I shot a glance over at her.

She watched her tablet intensely.

I took a good long look at the ball.

"Is this under vacuum?"

"No,"

she said.

"It's full of argon gas at one atmosphere of pressure.

The dots have been moving around the whole time the probe was returning from Venus.

So it looks like the argon doesn't affect them."

I looked all around the lab.

"There's no glove box here.

I can't just expose unknown samples to normal air."

"The entire room is full of argon,"

she said.

"Make sure you don't kink your air line or rip your suit.

If you breathe argon-"

"I'll suffocate and won't even know it's happening.

Yeah, okay."

I took the ball to a tray and carefully twisted it until it came container and mopped the other half with a dry cotton swab.

I scraped the swab against a slide and took it to a microscope.

I thought they'd be harder to find, but there they were.

Dozens of little black dots.

And they were indeed wriggling around.

"You recording all this?"

"From thirty-six different angles,"

she said.

"Sample consists of many round objects,"

I said.

"Almost no variance in size-each appears to be approximately ten microns in diameter..."

I adjusted the focus and tried various intensities of backlighting.

"Samples are opaque...I can't see inside, even at the highest available light setting...."

"Are they alive?"

Stratt asked.

I glared at her.

"I can't just tell that at a glance.

What do you expect to happen here?"

"I want you to find out if they're alive.

And if so, find out how they work."

"That's a tall order."

"Why?

Biologists worked out how bacteria works.

Just do the same thing they did."

"That took thousands of scientists two centuries to work out!"

"Well...do it faster than that."

"Tell you what"-I pointed back to the microscope-"I'm going to get back to work now.

I'll tell you anything I work out when I work it out.

Until then, you can all enjoy some quiet study time."

I spent the next six hours doing incremental tests.

Over that time, the military people wandered out, eventually leaving only Stratt by herself.

I had to admire her patience.

She sat in the back of the observation room and worked on her tablet, sometimes looking up to see what I was doing.

She perked up as I cycled my way through the airlock and into the observation room.

"Got something?"

she asked.

I unzipped the suit and stepped out of it.

"Yeah, a full bladder."

She typed on her tablet.

"I hadn't accounted for that.

I'll get a bathroom installed inside the quarantine area tonight.

It'll have to be a chemical toilet.

We can't have plumbing going in and out."

"Fine, whatever,"

I said.

I hustled off to the facilities to do my business.

When I returned, Stratt had pulled a small table and two chairs to the center of the observation room.

She sat in one of the chairs and gestured to the other.

"Have a seat."

"I'm in the middle of-"

"Have a seat."

I took a seat.

She had a commanding presence, that's for sure.

Something about her tone of voice or her general confidence level, maybe?

One way or another, when she spoke you just kind of assumed you should do what she said.

"What have you found so far?"

she asked.

"It's only been one afternoon,"

I said.

"I didn't ask how long it's been.

I asked what you've found out so far."

I scratched my head.

After hours in that suit, I was sweaty and presumably smelled bad.

"It's...weird.

I don't know what those dots are made of.

And I'd really like to know."

"Is there some equipment you need that you don't have?"

she asked.

"No, no.

There's everything a guy could hope for in there.

It just...doesn't work on these dots."

I settled back into the chair.

I'd been on my feet most of the day and it was nice to relax for a moment.

"First thing I tried was the x-ray spectrometer.

It sends x-rays into a sample, making it emit photons and you can tell from the wavelengths of the photons what elements are present."

"And what did that tell you?"

"Nothing.

As far as I can tell, these dots just absorb x-rays.

The x-rays go in and they never come out.

Nothing comes out.

That's very odd.

I can't think of anything that does that."

"Okay."

She took some notes on her tablet.

"What else can you tell me?"

"Next I tried gas chromatography.

That's where you vaporize the sample and then identify the elements or compounds in the resulting gas.

That didn't work either."

"Why not?"

I threw up my hands.

"Because the darn things just won't vaporize.

That led me down a rabbit hole of burners, ovens, and crucible furnaces that turned up nothing.

The dots are unaffected at temperatures up to two thousand degrees Celsius.

Nothing."

"And that's odd?"

"It's crazy odd,"

I said.

"But these things live on the sun.

At least some of the time.

So I guess having a high resistance to heat makes sense."

"They live on the sun?"

she said.

"So they're a life-form?"

"I'm pretty sure they are, yeah."

"Elaborate."

"Well, they move around.

It's plainly visible through the microscope.

That alone doesn't prove they're alive-inert stuff moves all the time from static charge or magnetic fields or whatever.

But there is something else I noticed.

Something weird.

And it made the pieces fall into place."

"Okay."

"I put a few dots under a vacuum and ran a spectrograph.

Just a simple test to see if they emit light.

And they do, of course.

They give off infrared light at the 25.984 micron wavelength.

That's the Petrova frequency-the light that makes the Petrova line.

I expected that.

But then I noticed they only emit light when they're moving.

And boy, do they emit a lot of it.

I mean, not a lot from our point of view, but for a tiny single-celled organism it's a ton."

"And how is that relevant?"

"I did some back-of-the napkin math.

And I'm pretty sure that light is how they move around."

Stratt raised an eyebrow.

"I don't follow."

"Believe it or not, light has momentum,"

I said.

"It exerts a force.

If you were out in space and you turned on a flashlight, you'd get a teeny, tiny amount of thrust from it."

"I didn't know that."

"Now you do.

And a teeny-tiny thrust on a teeny-tiny mass can be an effective form of propulsion.

I measured the dots' average mass at about twenty picograms.

That took a long time, by the way, but that lab equipment is awesome.

Anyway, the movement I see is consistent with the momentum of the emitted light."

She set her tablet down.

I had, apparently, accomplished the rare feat of getting her undivided attention.

"Is that something that happens in nature?"

I shook my head.

"No way.

Nothing in nature has that kind of energy storage.

You don't understand how much energy these dots are emitting.

It's like...getting to the scales of mass conversion.

E = mc2 kind of stuff.

These tiny dots have more energy stored up in them than remotely makes sense."

"Well,"

she said.

"They did just come from the sun.

And the sun is losing energy."

"Yeah.

That's why I think it's a life-form,"

I said.

"It consumes energy, stores it in some way we don't understand, then uses it for propulsion.

That's not a simple physical or chemical process.

That's complex and directed.

Something that must have evolved."

"So the Petrova line is...tiny little rocket flares?"

"Probably.

And I bet we're only seeing a small percentage of the total light coming off that area.

They use it to propel themselves to Venus or to the sun.

Or both.

I don't know.

Point is, the light will go away from their direction of travel.

Earth isn't in that line, so we only see the light that reflects off nearby space dust."

"Why do they go to Venus?"

she asked.

"And how do they reproduce?"

"Good questions.

Ones I don't have answers for.

But if they're single-celled stimulus/response organisms, they probably reproduce through mitosis."

I paused.

"That's when the cell splits in half to become two new cells-"

"Yes, I know that much, thank you."

She looked to the ceiling.

"People always assumed our first contact with alien life -if any existed-would be little green men in UFOs.

We never considered the idea of a simple, unintelligent species."

"Yeah,"

I said.

"This isn't Vulcans dropping by to say hi.

This is...space algae."

"An invasive species.

Like cane toads in Australia."

"Good analogy."

I nodded.

"And the population is growing.

Fast.

The more of them there are, the more solar energy gets consumed."

She pinched her chin.

"What would you call an organism that exists on a diet of stars?"

I struggled to remember my Greek and Latin root words.

"I think you'd call it 'Astrophage.' "

"Astrophage,"

she said.

She typed it into her tablet.

"Okay.

Get back to work.

Find out how they breed."

- Astrophage!

The word alone makes all my muscles clinch up.

A chilling terror that hits like a lead weight.

That's the name.

The thing that threatens all life on Earth.

Astrophage.

I glance at the monitor with my zoomed-in image of the sun.

The sunspots have moved noticeably.

Okay, it's a real-time image.

Good to know.

Waaaaait...I don't think they're moving at the right speed.

I check the stopwatch.

I was only daydreaming for ten minutes or so.

The sunspots should have moved a fraction of a degree.

But they're halfway off the screen.

Way more than they should have moved.

I pull the tape measure from my toga.

I zoom out the image and actually measure the widths of the sun and sunspot cluster on the screen.

No more rough estimates.

I want real math here.

The solar disc is 27 centimeters on-screen and the sunspots are 3 millimeters.

And they moved half their width (1.5 millimeters) in ten minutes.

Actually, it was 517 seconds, according to my stopwatch.

I scribble some math on my arm.

At this resolution, they're moving 1 millimeter every 344.66 seconds.

To cross the entire 27 centimeters it would take (scribble, scribble) just over 93,000 seconds.

So it'll take that long for the cluster to cross the near side of the sun.

It'll take twice that long to get all the way around.

So 186,000 seconds.

That's a little over two days.

Over ten times faster than the rotation should be.

This star I'm looking at...it's not the sun.

I'm in a different solar system.

O kay.

I think it's time I took a long gosh-darned look at these screens!

How am I in another solar system?!

That doesn't even make sense!

What star is that, anyway?!

Oh my God, I am so going to die!

I hyperventilate for a while.

I remember what I tell my students: If you're upset, take a deep breath, let it out, and count to ten.

It dramatically reduced the number of tantrums in my classroom.

I take a breath.

"One...two...thr-this isn't working!

I'm going to die!"

I hold my head in my hands.

"Oh God.

Where the heck am I?"

I scour the monitors for anything I can make sense of.

There's no lack of information-there's too much.

Each screen has a handy label on the top.

"Life Support,"

"Airlock Status,"

"Engines,"

"Robotics,"

"Astrophage,"

"Generators,"

"Centrifuge"-wait a minute.

Astrophage?

I check the Astrophage panel closely.

REMAINING: 20,906 KG CONSUMPTION RATE: 6.045 G/S Far more interesting than those numbers is the diagram below them.

It shows what I assume is the Hail Mary.

My first real overview of what this ship looks like.

The top of the ship is a cylinder with a nose cone at the front.

That's a rocket shape if ever I saw one.

Judging by the tapered, conical walls of the control room, this must be the very front of the ship.

Beneath me is the lab.

On the diagram that room is labeled "Lab."

Below that is the room I woke up in.

The one with my dead friends.

I sniffle and wipe away a tear.

No time for that right now.

I put it out of my head and keep looking at the diagram.

That room is named "Dormitory."

Okay, so this whole diagram lines up with my experiences.

And it's nice to know the official names of things.

Underneath the dormitory is a much shorter room, maybe about 1 meter high, named "Storage."

Aha!

There must be a panel in the floor that I missed.

I make a mental note to check that out later.

But there's more.

A lot more.

Under the storage area, there's an area labeled "Cable Faring."

No idea what that is or why it exists.

Beneath that, the ship fans out and there appear to be three cylinders the same width as my little area.

They're all side by side.

My guess is they assembled this ship in space and the largest diameter they could launch was about 4 meters.

The trio of cylinders-I'd estimate they're 75 percent of the total ship's volume-are labeled "Fuel."

The fuel area is broken up into nine subcylinders.

I tap one of them out of curiosity, and it brings up a screen for that one fuel bay.

It says : 0.000 .

It also has a button labeled "Jettison."

Well, I'm not sure why I'm here or what these things are all about, but I definitely don't want to hit any button labeled Jettison.

It's probably not as dramatic as it seems.

These are fuel tanks.

If the fuel has been spent, the ship can ditch the tank to reduce its mass and make the remaining fuel last longer.

It's the same reason rockets lifting off from Earth have multiple stages.

Interesting that the ship didn't automatically eject them as they became empty.

I dismiss the window and return to the main ship map.

Under each of those large fuel zones is a trapezoidal area labeled "Spin Drive."

I've never heard that term before, but since it's in the back of the ship and has the word "drive"

in its name, I assume it's the propulsion system.

Spin drive...spin drive...I close my eyes and try to think about it....

- Nothing happens.

I can't call up memories at will.

I'm not quite there yet.

I peer at the diagram more closely.

Why is there 20,000 kilograms of Astrophage on this ship?

I've got a strong suspicion.

It's the fuel.

And why not?

Astrophage can propel itself with light and has absurd energy-storage capability.

It's had God-knows-how-many billion years of evolution to get good at it.

Just like a horse is more energy efficient than a truck, Astrophage is more energy efficient than a spaceship.

Okay, that explains why there's a buttload of Astrophage on the ship.

It's fuel.

But why put a diagram of the ship on this screen?

That's like putting a blueprint of a car on its gas gauge.

Interestingly, the diagram doesn't really care about the rooms.

It doesn't even show what's inside them-just a label for each one and that's it.

However, the diagram is very focused on the hull and the rear part of the ship.

I see red pipes leading from the fuel areas to the spin drives.

Probably how fuel gets to the engines.

But I also see the pipes all along the hull of the ship.

And they cut across the Cable Faring area.

So the Astrophage fuel is mostly in the fuel tank, but also kept in a shell all around the hull.

Why do that?

Oh, and there are temperature readings all over the place.

I guess temperature is important because the readings are every few meters along the hull.

And every single one of them reads 96.415.

Hey, I know that temperature.

I know that exact temperature!

What do I know it from?

Come on, brain...come on...

- 96.415, read the display.

"Huh,"

I said.

"What is it?"

Stratt said immediately.

It was my second day in the lab.

Stratt still insisted I be the only person to look at Astrophage-at least for the time being.

She dropped her tablet on the table and came to the observation-room window.

"Something new?"

"Kind of.

The ambient temperature of an Astrophage is 96.415 degrees Celsius."

"That's pretty hot, isn't it?"

"Yeah, almost the boiling point of water,"

I said.

"For anything living on Earth it would be deadly.

But for a thing that's comfortable near the sun, who knows?"

"So what's significant about it?"

"I can't get them hotter or colder."

I pointed to the experiment I'd set up in the fume hood.

"I put some Astrophage in ice-cold water for an hour.

When I pulled them out, they were 96.415 degrees Celsius.

Then I put some in a lab furnace at one thousand degrees.

Again, after I pulled them out: 96.415 degrees."

Stratt paced next to the window.

"Maybe they have extremely good insulation?"

"I thought of that, so I did another experiment.

I took an extremely small droplet of water and put a few Astrophage in it.

After a few hours, the whole droplet was 96.415 degrees.

The Astrophage heated up the water, so that means heat energy can move out of it."

"What conclusion can you draw?"

she asked.

I tried to scratch my head, but the vinyl suit got in the way.

"Well, we know they have a huge amount of energy stored inside.

I'm guessing they use it to maintain body temperature.

Same way you and I do."

"A warm-blooded microorganism?"

she said.

I shrugged.

"Looks that way.

Hey, how much longer am I going to be the only person working on this?"

"Until you stop discovering new stuff."

"One guy alone in a lab?

That's not how science works,"

I said.

"There should be hundreds of people all over the world working on this."

"You're not alone in that thought,"

she said.

"I've had three different heads of state call me today."

"Then let other scientists in on it!"

"No."

"Why not?"

She looked away for a moment, then back through the window at me.

"Astrophage is an alien microbe.

What if it can infect humans?

What if it's deadly?

What if hazmat suits and neoprene gloves aren't enough protection?"

I gasped.

"Wait a minute!

Am I a guinea pig?

I'm a guinea pig!"

"No, it's not like that,"

she said.

I stared at her.

She stared at me.

I stared at her.

"Okay, it's exactly like that,"

she said.

"Dang it!"

I said.

"That's just not cool!"

"Don't be dramatic,"

she said.

"I'm just playing it safe.

Imagine what would happen if I sent Astrophage to the most brilliant minds on the planet and it killed them all.

In an instant we'd lose the very people we need the most right now.

I can't risk it."

I scowled.

"This isn't some cheesy movie, Stratt.

Pathogens evolve slowly over time to attack specific hosts.

Astrophage has never even been on Earth before.

There's just no way it can 'infect' humans.

Besides, it's been a couple of days and I'm not dead.

So send it out to the real scientists."

"You are a real scientist.

And you're making progress as fast as anyone else would.

There's no point in me risking other lives while you're getting it done on your own."

"Are you kidding?"

I said.

"With a couple hundred minds working on this, we'd make a lot more progress on-"

"Also, most deadly diseases have a minimum of least three days of incubation time."

"Ah, there it is."

She walked back to her table and picked up her tablet.

"The rest of the world will have their turn in time.

But for now it's just you.

At least tell me what the hell those things are made of.

Then we can talk about giving it to other scientists."

She resumed reading her tablet.

The conversation was over.

And she'd ended it by laying down what my students would call a "sick burn."

Despite my best efforts, I still had no idea what the heck Astrophage was made of.

They were opaque to every wavelength of light I threw at them.

Visible, infrared, ultraviolet, x-ray, microwaves...I even put a few Astrophage in a radiation-containment vessel and exposed it to the gamma rays emitted by Cesium-137 (this lab has everything).

I called it the "Bruce Banner Test."

Felt good about that name.

Anyway, even gamma couldn't penetrate the little bastards.

Which is like shooting a .50-caliber round at a sheet of paper and having it bounce off.

It just doesn't make any sense.

I sulked back to the microscope.

The little dots hung out on the slide where they'd been for hours.

This was my control set.

The ones I hadn't battered with various light sources.

"Maybe I'm overthinking this..."

I muttered.

I poked around the lab supplies until I found what I needed: nanosyringes.

They were rare and expensive, but the lab had them.

Basically, they were teeny, tiny needles.

Small enough and sharp enough to be used for poking microorganisms.

You could pull mitochondria out of a living cell with one of those babies.

Back to the microscope.

"Okay, you little reprobates.

You're radiation-proof, I'll grant you that.

But how about I stab you in the face?"

Normally a nanosyringe would be controlled by finely tuned equipment.

But I just wanted some stabby time and didn't care about the tool's integrity.

I grabbed the collet (where it would normally mount to the control machinery) and brought the needle into view in the microscope.

They're called nanosyringes, but they're actually about 50 nanometers wide.

Still, the needle was tiny compared to the hulking 10-micron Astrophage-only about one two-thousandth the width.

I poked an Astrophage with the needle and what happened next was nothing I could have expected.

First off, the needle penetrated.

No doubt on that front.

For all its resistance to light and heat, apparently, Astrophage was no better at dealing with sharp things than any other cell.

The instant I poked a hole in it, the whole cell became translucent.

No longer a featureless black dot, but a cell with organelles and everything else a microbiologist like me wants to see.

Just like that.

It was like flicking a switch.

And then it died.

The ruptured cell wall simply gave up the ghost and completely unraveled.

The Astrophage went from being a cohesive roundish object to a slowly widening puddle with no outer boundary.

I grabbed a normal needle from a nearby shelf and sucked up the goop.

"Yes!"

I said.

"I killed one!"

"Good for you,"

Stratt said without looking up from her tablet.

"First human to kill an alien.

Just like Arnold Schwarzenegger in Predator."

"Okay, I know you're trying to be funny, but that Predator died by deliberately setting off a bomb.

The first human to actually kill a Predator was Michael Harrigan-played by Danny Glover-in Predator 2."

She stared at me through the window for a moment, then shook her head and rolled her eyes.

"Point is, I can finally find out what Astrophage is made of!"

"Really?"

She set the tablet down.

"Killing it did the trick?"

"I think so.

It's not black anymore.

Light is getting through.

Whatever weird effect was blocking it isn't anymore."

"How did you do it?

What killed it?"

"I penetrated the outer cell membrane with a nanosyringe."

"You poked it with a stick?"

"No!"

I said.

"Well.

Yes.

But it was a scientific poke with a very scientific stick."

"It took you two days to think of poking it with a stick."

"You...be quiet."

I took the needle to the spectroscope and ejected the Astrophage goop onto the platform.

Then I sealed the chamber and fired up the analysis.

I bounced from one foot to the other like a little kid while I waited for the results.

Stratt craned her neck to watch me.

"So what's this you're doing now?"

"It's the atomic-emission spectroscope,"

I said.

"I told you about it earlier-it sends x-rays into a sample to excite the atoms, then watches the wavelengths that come back.

Didn't work at all when I tried it on the live Astrophage, but now that the magic light-stopping properties are gone, things should work like normal."

The machine beeped.

"All right!

Here we go!

Time to find out what chemicals are in a life-form that doesn't use water!"

I read the LCD screen.

It showed all the peaks and the elements they represented.

I stared at the screen silently.

"Well?"

Stratt said.

"Well?!"

"Um.

There's carbon and nitrogen...but the vast majority of the sample is hydrogen and oxygen."

I sighed and plopped down in the chair next to the machine.

"The ratio of hydrogen to oxygen is two to one."

"What's wrong?"

she asked.

"What does that mean?"

"It's water.

Astrophage is mostly water."

Her mouth fell open.

"How?

How can something that exists on the surface of the sun have water?"

I shrugged.

"Probably because it maintains its internal temperature at 96.415 degrees Celsius no matter what's going on outside."

"What does this all mean?"

she asked.

I put my head in my hands.

"It means every scientific paper I ever wrote is wrong."

- Well.

That's a kick in the pants.

But I wasn't happy in that lab anyway.

And they must have brought in smarter people than me, because here I am: at another star in a ship powered by Astrophage.

So why am I the one out here?

All I did was prove that my lifelong belief was wrong.

what star that is.

And why we built a ship to bring people here.

All important things, to be sure.

But right now, there's a whole area of the ship that I haven't explored yet.

Storage.

Maybe I can find something other than a makeshift toga to wear.

I climb down the ladder to the lab, and then farther downward into the dormitory.

My friends are still there.

Still dead.

I try not to look at them.

I scan the floor for any hint of an access panel.

Nothing.

So I get down on my hands and knees and crawl around.

Finally, I spot it-a very thin seam marking a square directly under my male crewmate's bunk.

I can't even wedge my fingernail into the seam it's so thin.

There were all manner of tools in the lab.

I'm sure there's a flathead screwdriver I could use to pry this open.

Or...

"Hey computer!

Open this access panel."

"Specify aperture to open."

I point to the panel.

"This.

This thing.

Open it."

"Specify aperture to open."

"Uh...open aperture to supply room."

"Unsealing supply room,"

says the computer.

There's a click and the panel raises a couple of inches.

A couldn't see it when the panel was closed, things were that tight.

I'm glad I didn't try to pry it open.

It would have been a pain in the butt.

I pull the remnants of the seal off the panel and the panel becomes loose in the opening.

I jiggle it a bit before figuring out I have to rotate it.

Once I rotate it 90 degrees it detaches and I set it aside.

I poke my head into the room below and see a bunch of soft-sided white cubes.

I guess that makes sense.

Packing stuff in soft containers lets you cram more things into the room.

Just as the diagram in the control room said, the storage area is about a meter high.

And completely full of those soft containers.

I would have to remove a bunch just to get in there -if I wanted to get in there.

I guess I'll have to eventually.

It looks a bit claustrophobic, to be honest.

Like the crawlspace under a house.

I grab the nearest package and pull it up through the opening.

The package is held together by Velcro straps.

I pull them apart and the container unfolds like a Chinese takeout box.

Inside are a bunch of uniforms.

Jackpot!

Though not really a coincidence.

Whoever packed this probably did it with careful planning.

And they knew the crew would want uniforms as soon as they woke up.

So they're in the first bag.

There are at least a dozen uniforms in the package.

They're each in vacuum-sealed plastic bags.

I open one at random.

It's a light-blue, one-piece jumpsuit.

Astronaut clothes.

The fabric is thin but feels comfortable.

On the left shoulder is the Hail Mary mission patch.

Same design I saw in the control room.

Beneath that is the Chinese flag.

The right shoulder has a white patch with a blue chevron triangle surrounded by a wreath design and the letters "CNSA."

I recognize it immediately, nerd that I am.

It's the Chinese National Space Agency logo.

There's a name tag over the left breast pocket.

It reads - the same character I saw in the Hail Mary mission crest.

It's pronounced Yo.

How do I know-?

Of course I know.

Commander Yo.

He was our leader.

I can see his face now.

Young and striking, eyes full of determination.

He understood the severity of the mission and the weight on his shoulders.

He was ready for the task.

He was stern but reasonable.

And you knew-you just knew-he would give up his life in a second for the mission or his crew.

I pull out another uniform.

Much smaller than the commander's.

The mission patch is the same, but there's a Russian flag beneath it.

And the right shoulder has a tilted red chevron surrounded by a ring.

It's the symbol of Roscosmos- the Russian space agency.

The name patch reads , another name from the crest.

This was Ilyukhina's uniform.

Olesya Ilyukhina.

She was hilarious.

She could have you laughing your butt off within thirty seconds of meeting you.

She just had one of those infectious and jovial personalities.

As serious as Yo was, Ilyukhina was casual.

They butted heads about it from time to time, but even Yo couldn't resist her charms.

I remember when he finally broke down and laughed at one of her jokes.

You can't be a hundred percent serious forever.

I stand up and look to the bodies.

No longer a stern commander; no longer a cheerful friend.

Just two empty husks that once held souls but now barely looked human.

They deserve more than this.

They deserve a burial.

The container holds multiple outfits for each crewmember.

I eventually find the ones for me.

They are exactly as I assumed they would be.

Hail Mary mission patch with a U.S.

flag underneath, a NASA logo on the right shoulder, and a name tag that says .

I put on my jumpsuit.

After more digging in the storage area I find footwear.

They're not shoes, really.

Just thick socks with rubber soles-booties with some grip.

I guess that's all we'd need for the mission.

I put them on as well.

Then I go about the grim task of dressing my departed comrades.

The jumpsuits don't remotely look the right size on their thin, desiccated bodies.

I even put the booties on.

Why not?

This is our uniform.

And a traveler deserves to be buried in uniform.

I start with Ilyukhina.

She weighs almost nothing.

I carry her over my shoulder as I climb the ladders all the way to the control room.

Once there, I set her on the floor and open the airlock.

The spacesuit inside is bulky and in the way.

I move it, piece by piece, into the control room and set it on the pilot's chair.

Then I put Olesya into the airlock.

The airlock controls are self-explanatory.

The air pressure inside the airlock and even the outer door are controllable by the panel in the control room.

There's even a Jettison button.

I close the door and activate the jettison process.

It starts with a buzzing alarm, blinking lights inside the airlock, and a verbal countdown.

There are three different blinking Abort switches inside the airlock.

Anyone who finds themselves in there during a jettison can easily cancel it.

Once the countdown finishes, the airlock decompresses to 10 percent of an atmosphere (according to the readouts).

Then it releases the outer door.

With a whoosh, Olesya is gone.

And, with the constantly accelerating ship, the body simply falls away.

"Olesya Ilyukhina,"

I say.

I don't remember her religion or if she even had one.

I don't know what she would have wanted said.

But at least I will remember her name.

"I commend your body to the stars."

It seems appropriate.

Maybe corny, but it makes me feel better.

Next I carry Commander Yo to the airlock.

I set him inside, seal it, and jettison his remains in the same way.

"Yo Li-Jie,"

I say.

I don't know how I remembered his given name.

It just came to me in the moment.

"I commend your body to the stars."

The airlock cycles and I am alone.

I was alone all along, but now I am truly alone.

The sole living human within several light-years, at least.

What do I do now?

- "Welcome back, Mr.

Grace!"

said Theresa.

The kids all sat in their desks, primed for science class.

"Thanks, Theresa,"

I said.

Michael piped in.

"The substitute teacher was booooring."

"Well, I'm not,"

I said.

I picked up four plastic bins from the corner.

"Today we're going to look at rocks!

Okay, maybe that is a little boring."

A chuckle from the kids.

"You're going to divide into four teams and each team will get a bin.

You have to separate the rocks into igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic.

First team to finish-and get every rock correctly categorized-gets beanbags."

"Can we pick our own teams?"

Trang asked excitedly.

"No.

That just leads to a bunch of drama.

Because children are animals.

Horrible, horrible animals."

Everyone laughed.

"Teams will be alphabetical.

So the first team is-"

Abby raised her hand.

"Mr.

Grace, can I ask a question?"

"Sure."

"What's happening to the sun?"

The whole class suddenly grew much more attentive.

"My dad says it's not a big deal,"

Michael said.

"My dad says it's a government conspiracy,"

said Tamora.

"Okay..."

I set the bins down and sat on the edge of my desk.

"So...basically, you know how there's algae in the ocean, right?

Well, there's sort of a space algae growing in the sun."

"Astrophage?"

said Harrison.

I almost slipped off the desk.

"Wh-Where did you hear that word?"

"That's what they're calling it now,"

said Harrison.

"The president called it that in a speech last night."

I'd been so isolated in that lab I didn't even know the president had given a speech.

And holy cow.

I invented that word for Stratt the day before.

In that time it got from her to the president to the media.

Wow.

"Okay, yes.

Astrophage.

And it's growing on the sun.

Or near it.

People aren't sure."

"So what's the problem?"

Michael asked.

"Algae in the ocean doesn't hurt us.

Why would algae on the sun?"

I pointed to him.

"Good question.

Thing is, Astrophage is starting to absorb a lot of the sun's energy.

Well, not a lot.

Just a tiny percentage.

But that means Earth gets a tiny bit less sunlight.

And that can cause real problems."

"So it'll be a little colder?

Like a degree or two?"

Abby asked.

"What's the big deal?"

"You guys know about climate change, right?

How our CO2 emissions have caused a lot of problems in the environment?"

"My dad says that's not real,"

said Tamora.

"Well, it is,"

I said.

"Anyway.

All the environmental problems we have from climate change?

They happened because the world's average temperature went up one and a half degrees.

That's it.

Just one and a half degrees."

"How much will this Astrophage stuff change Earth's temperature?"

asked Luther.

I stood and paced slowly in front of the class.

"We don't know.

But if it breeds like algae does, at about that same speed, climatologists are saying Earth's temperature could drop ten to fifteen degrees."

"What'll happen?"

Luther asked.

"It'll be bad.

Very bad.

A lot of animals-entire species-will die out because their habitats are too cold.

The ocean water will cool down, too, and it might cause an entire food-chain collapse.

So even things that could survive the lower temperature will starve to death because the things they eat all die off."

The kids stared at me, awestruck.

Why had their parents not explained this to them?

Probably because they didn't understand it themselves.

Besides, if I had a nickel for every time I wanted to smack a kid's parents for not teaching them even the most basic things...

well...I'd have enough nickels to put in a sock and smack those parents with it.

"Animals are going to die too?!"

Abby asked, horrified.

Abby rode horses competitively and spent most of her time at her grandfather's dairy farm.

Human suffering is often an abstract concept to kids.

But animal suffering is something else entirely.

"Yes, I'm sorry, but a lot of livestock will die.

And it's worse than that.

On land, crops will fail.

The food we eat will become scarce.

When that happens, the social order often breaks down and-"

I stopped myself there.

These were kids.

Why was I going this far?

"How-"

Abby began.

I'd never seen her at a loss for words.

"How long before this happens?"

"Climatologists think it'll happen within the next thirty years,"

I said.

Just like that, all the kids relaxed.

"Thirty years?"

Trang laughed.

"That's forever!"

"It's not that long..."

I said.

But to a bunch of twelve- and thirteen-year-olds, thirty years may as well be a million.

"Can I be on Tracy's team for the rock-sorting assignment?"

asked Michael.

Thirty years.

I looked out at their little faces.

In thirty years they'd all be in their early forties.

They would bear the brunt of it all.

And it wouldn't be easy.

These kids were going to grow up in an idyllic world and be thrown into an apocalyptic nightmare.

They were the generation that would experience the Sixth Extinction Event.

I felt a cramp in the pit of my stomach.

I was looking out at a room full of children.

Happy children.

And there was a good chance some of them would literally die of starvation.

"I..."

I stammered.

"I have to go do a thing.

Forget the rock assignment."

"What?"

asked Luther.

"Do...study hall.

This is study hall for the rest of the hour.

Just do homework from other classes.

Stay in your seats and work quietly until the bell rings."

I left the room without another word.

I almost collapsed in the hall from the shakes.

I went to a nearby drinking fountain and splashed water on my face.

Then I took a deep breath, got some self-control back, and jogged to the parking lot.

I drove fast.

Way too fast.

I ran red lights.

I cut people off.

I never do any of that, but that day was different.

That day was...I don't even know.

I screeched into the lab parking lot and left my car parked at an odd angle.

Two U.S.

Army soldiers were at the doors to the complex.

Just as they had been the previous two days while I'd been working there.

I stormed past them.

"Should we have stopped him?"

I heard one ask the other.

I didn't care what the response was.

I stomped into the observation room.

Stratt was there, of course, reading her tablet.

She looked up and I caught a glimpse of genuine surprise on her face.

"Dr.

Grace?

What are you doing here?"

Past her, through the windows, I spotted four people in containment suits working in the lab.

"Who are they?"

I said, pointing at the window.

"And what are they doing in my lab?"

"Can't say I like your tone-"

she said.

"I don't care."

"And it's not your lab.

It's my lab.

Those technicians are collecting the Astrophage."

"What are you going to do with it?"

She held her tablet under her arm.

"Your dream is coming true.

I'm dividing up the Astrophage and sending it to thirty different labs around the world.

Everything from CERN to a CIA bioweapons facility."

"The CIA has a biowea-?"

I began.

"Never mind.

I want to do more work on this."

She shook her head.

"You've done your part.

We thought it was anhydrous life.

Turns out it wasn't.

You proved that.

And since no alien exploded out of your chest, we can consider the guinea-pig phase over too.

So you're done."

"No, I'm not done.

There's a lot more to learn."

"Of course there is,"

she said.

"And I have thirty labs all eagerly waiting to get started on it."

I stepped forward.

"Leave some Astrophage here.

Let me work it some more."

She stepped forward as well.

"No."

"Why not?!"

"According to your notes, there were one hundred and seventy-four living Astrophage cells in the sample.

And you killed one yesterday, so we're down to a hundred and seventy- three."

She pointed to her tablet.

"Each of these labs-huge, national labs-will get five or six cells each.

That's it.

We're down to that level of scarcity.

Those cells are the one hundred and seventy- three most important things on Earth right now.

Our analysis of them will determine if humanity survives."

She paused and spoke a little more softly.

"I get it.

You spent your whole life trying to prove that life doesn't require water.

Then, unbelievably, you get some actual extraterrestrial life and it turns out to need water.

That's rough.

Shake it off and get back to your life.

I've got it from here."

"I'm still a microbiologist who spent his career working up theoretical models for alien life.

I'm a useful resource with a skill set almost no one else has."

"Dr.

Grace, I don't have the luxury of leaving samples here just to stroke your bruised ego."

"Ego?!

This isn't about my ego!

It's about my children!"

"You don't have children."

"Yes, I do!

Dozens of them.

They come to my class every day.

And they're all going to end up in a Mad Max nightmare world if we don't solve this problem.

Yeah, I was wrong about the water.

I don't care about that.

I care about those kids.

So give me some gosh-darned Astrophage!"

She stepped back and pursed her lips.

She looked to the side, thinking it over.

Then she turned back to me.

"Three.

You can have three Astrophage."

I unclenched my muscles.

"Okay."

I breathed a little.

I didn't realize how tense I'd been.

"Okay.

Three.

I can work with that."

She typed on her tablet.

"I'll keep this lab open.

It's all yours.

Come back in a few hours and my guys will be gone."

I was already halfway into a containment suit.

"I'm getting back to work now.

Tell your guys to stay out of my way."

She glared at me but didn't say anything further.

- I have to do this for my kids.

I mean...they're not my kids.

But they're my kids.

I look at the screens arrayed before me.

I need to think about this.

My memory is spotty.

Seems reliable enough, but incomplete.

Instead of waiting for an epiphany where I remember everything, what can I work out right now?

Earth is in trouble.

The sun is infected with Astrophage.

I'm in a spaceship in another solar system.

This ship wasn't easy to build and it had an international crew.

We're talking about an interstellar mission-something that should be impossible with our technology.

Okay, so humanity put a lot of time and effort into this mission, and Astrophage was the missing link that enabled it.

There's only one explanation: There's a solution to the Astrophage problem here.

Or a potential solution.

Something promising enough to dedicate a huge amount of resources.

I scour the screens for more info.

Mostly they seem to be the kinds of things you'd expect on a spaceship.

Life support, navigation, that sort of thing.

One screen is labeled "Beetles."

The next screen over says- Wait, beetles?

Okay, I don't know if it has anything to do with anything, but I need to find out if there are a bunch of beetles on this ship.

That's the sort of thing a guy needs to know.

The screen is broken into four quadrants, each one showing nearly the same thing.

A little schematic and a bunch of text information.

The schematics each show a bulbous, oblong shape with a pointed head and a trapezoid on the back.

If you tilt your head just right and squint, I suppose it kind of looks like a beetle.

Each beetle also has a name up top: "John,"

"Paul,"

"George,"

and "Ringo."

Yeah, I get it.

I'm not laughing, but I get it.

I arbitrarily pick one beetle, John, and give it a good look.

John is no insect.

I'm pretty sure he's a spaceship.

The trapezoid in the rear is labeled "Spin Drive,"

and the entire label and a "Radio"

label.

I look a little closer.

The Fuel info box says : 120-: 96.415.

The Computer box says : 3 .

5 .

And the Radio info just says : 100%.

It's an unmanned probe.

Something small, I guess.

The entire mass of the fuel is just 120 kilograms.

That's not a lot.

But a little Astrophage goes a long way.

There aren't any scientific instruments labeled.

What's the point of an unmanned ship with nothing on board?

Wait...what if the 5 terabytes of storage is the point of the ship?

A realization dawns on me.

"Oh.

Shucks,"

I say.

I'm out in space.

I'm in another star system.

I don't know how much Astrophage it took to get here, but it was probably a lot.

Sending a ship to another star probably took an absurd amount of fuel.

Sending that ship to another star and bringing it back would take ten times as much fuel.

I check the Astrophage panel to refresh my memory.

REMAINING: 20,862 KG CONSUMPTION RATE: 6.043 G/S The consumption rate was 6.045 grams per second before.

So it's gone down a little bit.

And the fuel amount went down too.

Basically, as the fuel gets consumed, the total mass of the ship goes down, so it needs less fuel per second to maintain the constant acceleration.

Okay, that all makes sense.

I have no idea what the Hail Mary's mass is, but to be able to shove it along at 1.5 g's of acceleration on a few grams of fuel per second...Astrophage is amazing stuff.

Anyway, I don't know exactly how the consumption rate will change over time (I mean, I could work it out, but it's complicated).

So for now I'll just approximate it to 6 grams per second.

How long will that fuel last?

It's nice to have a jumpsuit on.

It's got pockets for all sorts of knickknacks.

I still haven't found a calculator, so I do the math with a pen and paper.

Grand total, I'll run out of fuel in about forty days.

I don't know what star that is, but it's not the sun.

And there's just no way to get from any other star to Earth with just forty days of accelerating at 1.5 g's.

It probably took years to get here from Earth-which might be why I was in a coma.

Interesting.

Anyway, all this can only mean one thing: The Hail Mary isn't going home.

This is a one-way ticket.

And I'm pretty sure these beetles are how I'm supposed to send information back to Earth.

There's no way I have a radio transmitter powerful enough to broadcast several light-years.

I don't know if that would even be possible to build.

So instead, I have these little "beetle"

ships with 5 terabytes of information each.

They'll fly back to Earth and broadcast their data.

There's four of them for redundancy.

I'm probably supposed to put copies of my findings in each one and send them all home.

If at least one survives the journey, Earth is saved.

I'm on a suicide mission.

John, Paul, George, and Ringo get to go home, but my long and winding road ends here.

I must have known all this when I volunteered.

But to my amnesia- riddled brain this is new information.

I'm going to die out here.

And I'm going to die alone.

I glared at the Astrophage.

"Why the heck do you go to Venus?"

The microscope view was displayed on the big wall-mounted monitor.

Each of the three little cells were a foot across at this magnification.

I watched for any clues to their motivations, but Larry, Curly, and Moe offered no answer.

I'd named them, of course.

It's a teacher thing.

"What's so special about Venus?

And how do you even find it?"

I crossed my arms.

If Astrophage understood body language, they'd know I wasn't messing around.

"It takes a room full of really smart people at NASA to work out how to get to Venus.

And you do it as a single-celled organism with no brain."

It had been two days since Stratt left me alone with the lab.

The army guys were still at the doors.

One was named Steve.

Friendly guy.

The other never spoke to me.

I ran my hands through my greasy hair (I'd neglected to shower that morning).

At least I didn't have to wear the hazmat suit anymore.

Scientists in Nairobi had taken a chance with one of their Astrophage and exposed it to Earth atmosphere to see what happened.

It was unaffected.

So, thanks to them, labs all over the world could breathe a sigh of relief and stop working in argon-filled rooms.

I glanced at the pile of papers on a desk.

The scientific community had moved into overdrive in a very unscientific way.

Gone were the days of careful peer review and published articles.

Astrophage research was a free-for-all where researchers posted their findings immediately and without proof.

It led to misunderstandings and mistakes, but we just didn't have time to do things the right way.

Stratt kept me in the loop on most stuff.

Not everything, I was sure.

Who knows what other weird things she was up to.

She seemed to have authority everywhere.

A Belgian research team was able to prove that Astrophage reacts to magnetic fields, but only sometimes.

Other times, it seems to ignore magnetic fields entirely, no matter how powerful.

Still, the Belgians were able to (very inconsistently) steer Astrophage around by putting it in a magnetic field and changing the field's orientation.

Was that useful?

No idea.

At this point the world was just collecting data.

A researcher in Paraguay showed that ants will get disoriented when they're within a few centimeters of Astrophage.

Was that useful?

Okay, that one probably wasn't useful.

But it was interesting.

Most notably, a group in Perth sacrificed one of their Astrophage and did a detailed analysis on all the organelles inside.

They found DNA and mitochondria.

In any other situation, this would have been the most important discovery of the century.

Alien life-indisputably alien-had DNA and mitochondria!

And...grumble...a bunch of water...

Point is: The inside of an Astrophage wasn't much different from the inside of any single-celled organism you'd find on Earth.

It used ATP, RNA transcription, and a whole host of other extremely familiar things.

Some researchers speculated that it originated on Earth.

Others postulated this specific set of molecules was the only way for life to occur and Astrophage evolved it independently.

And a smaller, vocal faction suggested life might not have evolved on Earth at all, and that Astrophage and terrestrial life have a common ancestor.

"You know,"

I told the Astrophage, "if you boys weren't threatening all life on my planet, you'd be pretty awesome.

You have mysteries within mysteries."

I leaned against a table.

"You have mitochondria.

Okay, so that means you use ATP as your energy storage, just like we do.

But the light you use to move around requires waaaay more energy than your ATP can hold.

So you have another energy- storage pathway.

One we don't understand."

One of the Astrophage on-screen darted slightly to the left.

It was pretty common.

Once in a while, for no real reason, they'd just wiggle.

"What makes you move?

Why move?

And how does this random jerky motion get you from the sun to Venus?

And why do you go to Venus at all?!"

Lots of people were working on the internals of Astrophage.

Trying to figure out what made it tick.

Analyzing its DNA.

Good for them.

I wanted to know the basic life-cycle.

That was my goal.

Single-celled organisms don't just store buttloads of energy and fly through space for no reason.

There had to be something Astrophage needed from Venus or it would just stay on the sun.

And it needed something from the sun, too, or it would stay on Venus.

The sun part was pretty easy: It was there for the energy.

Same reason plants grew leaves.

Got to get that sweet, sweet energy if you're going to be a life-form.

Makes perfect sense.

So what about Venus?

I picked up a pen and fidgeted with it as I thought.

"According to the Indian Space Research Organization, you guys get going up to 0.92 times the speed of light."

I pointed at them.

"Didn't know we could do that, did ya?

Figure out your velocity?

They used Doppler-shift analysis of the light you emit to work it out.

And because of that, they also know you're going both directions: to and from Venus."

I frowned.

"But if you hit an atmosphere at that speed you should die.

So why don't you?"

I rapped my forehead with a knuckle.

"Because you can handle any amount of heat.

Right.

So you blast into the atmosphere, but you don't get any hotter.

Okay, but you'd have to at least slow down.

So you'd just be in the upper atmosphere of Venus.

Then you...what?

Turn around and go back to the sun?

Why?"

I stared at the screen for a solid ten minutes, lost in thought.

"All right, enough of this.

I want to know how you find Venus."

I went to the local hardware store and bought a bunch of two- by-fours, three-quarter-inch plywood, power tools, and other stuff I'd need.

Steve the army guy helped me carry a lot of it in.

Jerk army guy did nothing.

Over the next six hours, I built a lightproof closet with a shelf in it.

It was just big enough for me to get in and out.

I set the microscope on the shelf.

The "door"

was a plywood panel that I could remove with screws.

I ran power and video lines into the closet through a little hole that I plugged up with putty to make sure no light could get in through there either.

I set my IR camera up on the microscope and sealed up the closet.

Out in the lab, the monitor showed the infrared light the camera saw.

It was basically a frequency shift.

Very low bands of IR would show up as red.

Higher-energy bands would be orange, yellow, and so on up the rainbow.

I could see the Astrophage cells as little red blobs, which was expected.

At their constant temperature of 96.415 degrees Celsius they would naturally emit an IR wavelength of 7.8 microns or so-the low end of what I'd set the camera to look for.

It was good confirmation that the setup was working.

But I didn't care about that dark-red color.

I wanted to see a bright-yellow flash.

That would be the Petrova frequency that Astrophage spit out to move around.

If any of my Astrophages moved even the tiniest amount, I'd see a very obvious yellow flash.

But it never came.

Nothing happened.

Nothing at all.

Usually, I'd see a jerky motion from at least one of them every few seconds.

But now there was nothing.

"So,"

I said.

"You little brats have settled down, eh?"

Light.

Whatever their navigation system was, it was based on light.

I suspected that would be the case.

What else could you use in space?

There's no sound.

No smell.

It would have to be light, gravity, or electromagnetism.

And light's the easiest of those three to detect.

At least, as far as evolution is concerned.

For my next experiment, I taped a little white LED and a watch battery together.

Of course, I wired it backward at first and the LED didn't light up.

That's pretty much a rule in electronics: You never get diodes right on the first try.

Anyway, I rewired it correctly and the LED lit up.

I taped the whole contraption to the inside wall of the closet.

I made sure to position it so the Astrophage on the sample slide would have a direct line of sight on it.

Then I sealed everything up again.

Now, from the Astrophage's point of view, there was a lot of black nothingness and one shining spot of white.

That's kind of what Venus might look like if you were out in space and looking directly away from the sun.

They didn't budge.

No hint of motion at all.

"Hmph,"

I said.

To be fair, it wasn't likely to work.

If you were at the sun, looking away from it for the brightest splotch of light you could see, you'd probably zero in on Mercury, not Venus.

Mercury is smaller than Venus, but it's a lot closer so you'd see more light.

"Why Venus?"

I mused.

But then I thought of a better question.

"How do you guys identify Venus?"

Why did they move randomly?

My theory: By pure chance, every few seconds or so, an Astrophage thought it had spotted Venus.

So it thrusted in that direction.

But then the moment passed, so it stopped thrusting.

The key had to be frequencies of light.

My boys didn't wiggle at all in darkness.

But it wasn't just about the sheer volume of light, or they would have gone for the LED.

It had to be something about the frequency of the light.

Planets don't just reflect light.

They also emit it.

Everything emits light.

The temperature of the object defines the wavelength of light emitted.

Planets are no exception.

So maybe Astrophage looked for Venus's IR signature.

It wouldn't be as bright as Mercury's, but it would be distinct-a different "color."

A little googling told me Venus's average temperature was 462 degrees Celsius.

I had a whole drawer full of replacement bulbs for microscopes and other lab stuff.

I grabbed one and hooked it up to a variable power supply.

Incandescent bulbs work by getting the filament so hot it emits visible light.

That happens around 2,500 degrees Celsius.

I didn't need anything so dramatic.

I just needed a measly 462 degrees.

I adjusted power going through the bulb up and down, watching with an IR camera, until I got exactly the light frequency I wanted.

I moved the whole contraption into my test closet, watched the monitor with my boys on it, and turned on the artificial Venus.

Nothing.

Absolutely no movement from the little jerks.

"What do you want from me?!"

I demanded.

I pulled my goggles off and threw them to the ground.

I drummed my fingers on the table.

"If I were an astronomer, and someone showed me a blob of light, how would I know if it's Venus?"

I answered myself.

"I'd look for that IR signature!

But that's not what Astrophage does.

Okay, someone shows me a blob of light and says I'm not allowed to use emitted IR to work out the temperature of the body.

How else could I find out if it's Venus?"

Spectroscopy.

Look for carbon dioxide.

I raised an eyebrow as the idea came to me.

When light hits gas molecules, the electrons get all worked up.

Then they calm down and re-emit the energy as light.

But the frequency of the photons they emit is very specific to the molecules involved.

Astronomers used this for decades to know what gases are out there far, far away.

That's what spectroscopy is all about.

Venus's atmosphere is ninety times Earth's pressure and almost entirely carbon dioxide.

Its spectroscopy signature of CO2 would be overwhelmingly strong.

Mercury had no carbon dioxide at all, so the nearest competitor would be Earth.

But we had a minuscule CO2 signature compared to Venus.

Maybe Astrophage used emission spectra to find Venus?

New plan!

The lab had a seemingly infinite supply of light filters.

Pick a frequency, and there's a filter for it.

I looked up the spectral signature of carbon dioxide-the peak wavelengths were 4.26 microns and 18.31 microns.

I found the appropriate filters and built a little box for them.

Inside I put a small white lightbulb.

Now I had a box that would emit the spectral signature of carbon dioxide.

I put it in the test closet and went out to watch the monitor.

Larry, Curly, and Moe hung out on their slide, just like they had all day long.

I flicked on the light box and watched for any reaction.

The Astrophage left.

They didn't just meander toward the light.

They were gone.

Absolutely gone.

"Um..."

I had been recording the camera input, of course.

I ran it back to watch frame by frame.

Between two frames they simply disappeared.

"Um!"

Good news: Astrophage were attracted to carbon dioxide's spectral signature!

Bad news: My three irreplaceable, 10-micron-wide Astrophage had launched off somewhere-maybe at velocities approaching the speed of light-and I had no idea where they went.

"Craaaaaap."

- Midnight.

Darkness everywhere.

The army guys changed shift to two guys I didn't know.

I missed Steve.

I had aluminum foil and duct tape up over every window of the lab.

I sealed the cracks around the entrances and exits with electrical tape.

I turned off every piece of equipment that had a readout or LED of any kind.

I put my watch in a drawer because it had glow-in-the-dark paint on the hands.

I let my eyes adjust to the total darkness.

If I saw so much as a single shape that wasn't my imagination, I sought out the light leak and put tape over it.

Finally, I reached a level of darkness so intense I couldn't see anything.

Opening or closing my eyes had no effect at all.

The next step was my newly invented IR goggles.

The lab had many things, but infrared goggles were not among them.

I'd considered asking Steve the army guy if he could score some.

I probably could have called Stratt and she would have had the president of Peru personally deliver them or something.

But this was faster.

The "goggles"

were just the LCD output screen of my IR camera with a bunch of tape around them.

I pressed them to my face and added more tape.

Then more and more and more.

I'm sure I looked ridiculous.

But whatever.

I fired up the camera and looked around the lab.

Plenty of heat signatures.

The walls were still warm from sunlight earlier that day, everything electrical had a glow, and my body shined like a beacon.

I adjusted the frequency range to look for much hotter things.

Specifically, things over 90 degrees Celsius.

I crawled into my makeshift microscope closet and looked at the light box I'd used for the CO2 spectral emission.

Astrophage are only 10 microns across.

No chance I'd see something so small with the camera (or with my eyes, for that matter).

But my little aliens are very hot, and they stay hot.

So, if they're not moving, they will have spent the last six hours or so slowly heating up their surroundings.

That was the hope.

It panned out.

I immediately saw a circle of light on one of the plastic light filters.

"Oh thank God,"

I gasped.

It was very faint but it was there.

The spot was about 3 millimeters across and grew fainter and colder away from the center.

The little fella had been heating up the plastic for hours.

I scanned back and forth across the two plastic squares.

I quickly found a second spot.

My experiment worked way better than I expected.

They saw what they thought was Venus and beelined for it.

When they hit the light filters, they couldn't go any farther.

They probably kept pushing until I turned off the light.

Anyway, if I could just confirm that all three Astrophage were present, I could bag the filters, then spend however long I needed to find and harvest the boys from them with a microscope and pipette.

And there it was.

The third Astrophage.

"The gang's all here!"

I said.

I reached into my pocket for a sample bag and got ready to very carefully pull the filter off the light box.

That's when I saw the fourth Astrophage.

Just...minding its own business.

A fourth cell.

It was right in the same general cluster as the first three, on the filters.

"Holy..."

I'd been staring at these guys for a week.

There's no way I would have missed one.

There could only be one explanation: One of the Astrophage divided.

I'd accidentally made the Astrophage reproduce.

I stared at that fourth spot of light for a full minute, taking in the magnitude of what had just happened.

Breeding Astrophage meant we would have an unlimited supply for study.

Kill them, poke them, take them apart, do whatever we wanted.

This was a game changer.

"Hello, Shemp,"

I said.

- I spent the next two days obsessively studying this new behavior.

I didn't even go home-I just slept in the lab.

Steve the army guy brought me breakfast.

Great guy.

I should have shared all my findings with the rest of the science community, but I wanted to be sure.

Peer review may have fallen by the wayside, but at least I could self-review.

Better than nothing.

The first thing that bothered me: CO2 spectral emissions are 4.26 and 18.31 microns.

But Astrophage are only 10 microns across, so it couldn't really interact with light that had a larger wavelength.

How could it even see the 18.31 micron band?

I repeated my earlier spectral experiment with just the 18.31 micron filter and got a result I didn't expect.

Strange things happened.

First off, two of the Astrophage whipped over to the filter.

They saw the light and went right for it.

But how?

It should be impossible for Astrophage to interact with a wavelength that big.

I mean...literally impossible!

Light is a funny thing.

Its wavelength defines what it can and can't interact with.

Anything smaller than the wavelength is functionally nonexistent to that photon.

That's why there's a mesh over the window of a microwave.

The holes in the mesh are too small for microwaves to pass through.

But visible light, with a much shorter wavelength, can go through freely.

So you get to watch your food cook without melting your face off.

Astrophage is smaller than 18.31 microns but somehow still absorbs light at that frequency.

How?

But that's not even the strangest thing that happened.

Yes, two of them took off for the filter, but the other two stayed put.

They didn't seem to care.

They just hung out on the slide.

Maybe they didn't interact with the larger wavelength?

So I did one more experiment.

I shined the 4.26 micron light at them again.

And I got the same results.

The same two went right for the filter as before, and the other two just didn't care.

And there it was.

I couldn't be 100 percent certain, but I was pretty sure I'd just discovered the whole Astrophage life-cycle.

It clicked in my mind like puzzle pieces finally fitting together.

The two holdouts didn't want to go to Venus anymore.

They wanted to go back to the sun.

Why?

Because one of them just divided and created the other.

Astrophage hang out on the surface of the sun gathering energy via heat.

They store it internally in some way no one understands.

Then, when they have enough, they migrate to Venus to breed, using that stored energy to fly through space using infrared light as a propellant.

Lots of species migrate to breed.

Why would Astrophage be any different?

The Aussies already worked out that the inside of Astrophage wasn't much different from Earth life.

It needed carbon and oxygen to make the complex proteins required for DNA, mitochondria, and all the other fun stuff found in cells.

There's plenty of hydrogen on the sun.

But the other elements just aren't present.

So Astrophage migrates to the nearest supply of carbon dioxide: Venus.

First, it follows magnetic field lines and goes straight away from the sun's North Pole.

It has to do that, or the light from the sun would be too blinding to find Venus.

And going straight up from the pole means the Astrophage will have a full view of Venus's entire orbital path-no portion of it occluded by the sun.

Ah, and that's why Astrophage is so inconsistent on reacting to magnetic fields.

It only cares about them at the very beginning of its journey and at no other time.

Then it looks for Venus's massive carbon dioxide spectral signature.

Well, not really "looks for."

It's probably more a simple stimulus-response thing initiated by the 4.26 and 18.31 micron light bands.

Anyway, once it "sees"

Venus, it goes straight to it.

The path it takes-straight away from the solar pole, then sharply turning toward Venus-that's the Petrova line.

Our heroic Astrophage reaches the upper atmosphere of Venus, collects the CO2 it needs, and can finally reproduce.

After that, both parent and child return to the sun and the cycle begins anew.

It's simple, really.

Get energy, get resources, and make copies.

It's the same thing all life on Earth does.

And that was why two of my little Stooges didn't walk toward the light.

So how does Astrophage find the sun?

My guess: Look for the extremely bright thing and head that way.

I separated Moe and Shemp (the sun-seekers) from Larry and Curly (the Venus-seekers).

I put Larry and Curly on a different slide and put it in a light-sealed sample container.

Then I set up an experiment in the dark closet for Moe and Shemp.

This time, I put a bright incandescent bulb in there and turned it on.

I expected them to head right toward it, but no dice.

They didn't budge.

Probably not bright enough.

I went to a photography store downtown (San Francisco has a lot of photography enthusiasts) and bought the largest, brightest, most powerful flash I could find.

I replaced the lightbulb with the flash and did the experiment again.

Moe and Shemp took the bait!

I had to sit down and take a breath.

I should have taken a nap -I hadn't slept in thirty-six hours.

But this was too exciting.

I pulled out my cell phone and dialed Stratt's number.

She answered halfway through the first ring.

"Dr.

Grace,"

she said.

"Find something?"

"Yeah,"

I said.

"I figured out how Astrophage reproduce and managed to make it happen."

Silence for a second.

"You successfully bred Astrophage?"

"Yes."

"Nondestructively?"

she asked.

"I had three cells.

I now have four.

They're all alive and well."

Silence for another second.

"Stay there."

She hung up.

"Huh,"

I said.

I put the phone back in my lab coat.

"Guess she's on her way."

Steve the army guy burst into the lab.

"Dr.

Grace?!"

"Wha...uh, yeah?"

"Please come with me."

"Okay,"

I said.

"Let me just get my Astrophage samples put away-"

"There are lab techs on the way to deal with all that.

You have to come with me now."

"O-Okay..."

- The next twelve hours were...unique.

Steve the army guy drove me to a high school football field where a U.S.

Marine Corps helicopter had already landed.

Without words, they hustled me into the chopper and up we went into the sky.

I tried not to look down.

The chopper took me to Travis Air Force Base, about 60 miles north of the city.

Did the marines often land at air force bases?

I don't know much about the military, but that seemed odd.

It also seemed a bit extreme to send in the marines just to keep me from driving through a couple of hours of traffic, but okay.

There was a jeep waiting for me on the tarmac where the helicopter landed, with an air force guy standing next to it.

He introduced himself, I swear he did, but I don't remember his name.

He drove me across the tarmac to a waiting jet.

No, not a passenger jet.

And not a Learjet or anything like that.

This was a fighter jet.

I don't know what kind.

Like I said, I don't know military stuff.

My guide hustled me up a ladder and into the seat behind the pilot.

He gave me a pill and a little paper cup of water.

"Take this."

"What is it?"

"It'll keep you from puking all over our nice, clean cockpit."

"Okay."

I swallowed the pill.

"And it'll help you sleep."

"What?"

Away he went, and the ground crew pulled away the ladder.

The pilot didn't say a word to me.

Ten minutes later, we took off like a bat out of hell.

I'd never felt acceleration like that in my life.

The pill did its job.

I definitely would have puked.

"Where are we going?"

I asked through the headset.

"I'm sorry, sir.

I'm not allowed to speak to you."

"This is going to be a boring trip, then."

"They usually are,"

he said.

I don't know exactly when I fell asleep but it was within minutes of taking off.

Thirty-six hours of mad science plus whatever was in that pill put me right into dreamland regardless of the ridiculous jet-engine noise surrounding me.

I awoke in darkness to a jolt.

We'd landed.

"Welcome to Hawaii, sir,"

said the pilot.

"Hawaii?

Why am I in Hawaii?"

"I wasn't given that information."

The jet taxied onto some side runway or whatever and a ground crew brought a ladder.

I hadn't gotten halfway down the ladder yet when I heard "Dr.

Grace?

This way, please!"

It was a man in a U.S.

Navy uniform.

"Where the hell am I?!"

I demanded.

"Naval Station Pearl Harbor,"

said the officer.

"But not for long.

Please follow me."

"Sure.

Why not?"

They put me in another jet with another non-talkative pilot.

The only difference was that this time it was a navy jet instead of an air force jet.

We flew for a long time.

I lost track of the hours.

Keeping track was meaningless anyway.

I didn't know how long we'd be in the air.

Finally, I kid you not, we landed on an honest-to-God aircraft carrier.

Next thing I knew, I was on the flight deck looking like an idiot.

They gave me earmuffs and a coat and shuffled me over to a helipad.

A navy chopper was waiting for me.

"Will this trip...end?

Like...ever?!"

I asked.

They ignored me and got me strapped in.

The chopper took off immediately.

This time, the flight wasn't nearly so long.

Just an hour or so.

"This should be interesting,"

said the pilot.

It was the only thing he'd said the whole flight.

We descended and the landing gear deployed.

Below us was another aircraft carrier.

I squinted at it.

Something looked different.

What was it...oh, right.

It had a big Chinese flag flying over it.

"Is that a Chinese aircraft carrier?!"

I asked.

"Yes, sir."

"Are we, a U.S.

Navy helicopter, going to land on that Chinese aircraft carrier?"

"Yes, sir."

"I see."

We landed on the carrier's helipad and a bunch of Chinese Navy guys watched us with interest.

There would be no post- flight servicing of this chopper.

My pilot leered through the windows at them and they leered right back.

As soon as I stepped out, he took off again.

I was in China's hands now.

A navy man came forward and gestured for me to follow him.

I don't think anyone spoke English, but I got the general idea.

He led me to a door in the tower structure and we went inside.

We wound through passageways, stairwells, and rooms I didn't even understand the purpose of.

All the while, Chinese sailors watched me with curiosity.

Finally, he stopped at a door with Chinese characters on it.

He opened the door and pointed inside.

I walked in and he slammed the door behind me.

So much for my guide.

I think it was an officer's conference room.

At least, that was my assumption based on the big table with fifteen people sitting at it.

They all turned their heads to look up at me.

Some were white, some were black, some were Asian.

Some wore lab coats.

Others wore suits.

Stratt, of course, sat at the head of the table.

"Dr.

Grace.

How was your trip?"

"How was my trip?"

I said.

"I got dragged across the gosh- darned world without any notice-"

She held up her hand.

"It was just a pleasantry, Dr.

Grace.

I don't actually care how your trip was."

She stood and addressed the room.

"Ladies and gentlemen, this is Dr.

Ryland Grace from the United States.

He figured out how to breed Astrophage."

Gasps came from around the table.

One man shot to his feet and spoke with a thick German accent.

"Are you serious?

Stratt, warum haben sie-?"

"Nur Englisch,"

Stratt interrupted.

"Why are we only hearing of this now?"

the German demanded.

"I wanted to confirm it first.

While Dr.

Grace was en route, I had technicians pack up his lab.

They collected four live Astrophage from his lab.

I only left him three."

An elderly man in a lab coat spoke Japanese in a calm, soothing voice.

Next to him, a younger Japanese man in a charcoal suit translated.

"Dr.

Matsuka would like to respectfully request a detailed description of the process."

Stratt stepped aside and gestured to her chair.

"Doctor, have a seat and lay it out for us."

"Hold on,"

I said.

"Who are these people?

Why am I on a Chinese aircraft carrier?

And have you ever heard of Skype?!"

"This is an international body of high-level scientists and political operatives that I have assembled to spearhead Project Hail Mary."

"What's that?"

"That would take a while to explain.

Everyone here is eager to hear about your Astrophage findings.

Let's start with that."

I shuffled to the front of the room and sat awkwardly at the head of the table.

All eyes turned to me.

So I told them.

I told them all about the wooden closet experiments.

I explained all my tests, what I did for each one, and how I did them.

Then I explained my conclusions: I told them my hypothesis about the Astrophage life-cycle, how it works, and why.

There were a few questions from the assembled scientists and politicos, but mostly they just listened and took notes.

Several had translators whispering in their ear during the process.

"So...yeah,"

I said.

"That's pretty much everything.

I mean- it's not rigorously tested yet but it seems pretty simple."

German Guy raised his hand.

"Would it be possible to breed Astrophage on a large scale?"

Everyone leaned forward a little.

Apparently this was a pretty important question and it was on everyone's mind.

I was taken aback by the sudden intensity of the room.

Even Stratt seemed unusually interested.

"Well?"

she said.

"Please answer Minister Voigt."

"Sure,"

I said.

"I mean...why not?"

"How would you do it?"

asked Stratt.

"I guess I'd make a big elbow-shaped ceramic pipe and fill it with carbon dioxide.

Make one end of it as hot as you can get it and have a bright light there.

Wrap a magnetic coil around it to simulate the magnetic field of the sun.

Put an IR light emitter at the other end of the elbow and have it emit light at 4.26 and 18.31 microns.

Make the inside of the pipe as black as you can.

That should do it."

"How does that 'do it'?"

she said.

I shrugged.

"The Astrophage will gather energy at the 'sun' side and when they're ready to breed, they'll follow that magnetic field to the pipe's elbow.

They'll see the IR light at the other end and head toward it.

Seeing that light and being exposed to carbon dioxide makes them breed.

Then the parent and daughter cells will go back to the sun side.

Simple enough."

A political-looking man raised his hand and spoke with some kind of African accent.

"How much Astrophage could be made this way?

How fast is the process?"

"It would have a doubling time,"

I said.

"Like algae or bacteria.

I don't know how long it is, but considering the sun is getting dim it must be pretty quick."

A woman in a lab coat had been on her phone.

She set it down, then spoke with a thick Chinese accent.

"Our scientists have reproduced your results."

Minister Voigt scowled at her.

"How did you even know his process?

He just told us!"

"Spies, presumably,"

said Stratt.

The German huffed.

"How dare you circumvent us with-"

"Shush,"

said Stratt.

"We're past all that.

Ms.

Xi, do you have any additional information to share?"

"Yes,"

she said.

"We estimate the doubling time to be just over eight days, under optimal conditions."

"What does that mean?"

the African diplomat said.

"How much can we make?"

"Well."

I launched my phone's calculator app and tapped a few buttons.

"If you started with the one hundred and fifty Astrophage we have, and bred them for a year, at the end of it you'd have...about 173,000 kilograms of Astrophage."

"And would this Astrophage be at maximum energy density?

Would it all be ready to reproduce?"

"So you want...I guess you'd call it 'enriched' Astrophage?"

"Yes,"

he said.

"That's a perfect word for it.

We want Astrophage that is holding as much energy as it can."

"Uh...I guess that could be arranged,"

I said.

"First, breed up the number of Astrophage you want, then expose them to lots of heat energy but don't let them see any carbon dioxide spectral lines.

They'll collect energy and just sort of sit there waiting until they can see somewhere to get CO2."

"What if we needed two million kilograms of enriched Astrophage?"

said the diplomat.

"It's doubling every eight days,"

I said.

"Two million kilos would be another four doublings or so.

So, one month longer."

A woman leaned forward on the table, her fingers steepled.

"We might just have a chance."

She had an American accent.

"An outside chance,"

said Voigt.

"There is hope,"

said the Japanese translator-presumably speaking for Dr.

Matsuka.

"We need to talk amongst ourselves,"

said Stratt.

"Go get some rest.

The sailor outside will show you to a bunk."

"But I want to know about Project Hail Mary!"

"Oh, you will.

Believe me."

- I slept for fourteen hours.

Aircraft carriers are awesome in many ways, but they aren't five-star hotels.

The Chinese had given me a clean, comfy cot in an officer's bunkroom.

I had no complaints.

I could have slept on the flight deck I was so tired.

I felt something weird on my forehead when I woke up.

I reached up and it was a Post-it note.

Someone put a Post-it on my head while I slept.

I pulled it off and read it: Clean clothes and toiletries in the duffel under your bunk.

Show this note to any sailor when you've cleaned up: 7 -Stratt "She is such a pain in my butt..."

I mumbled.

I stumbled out of my cot.

A few officers gave me passing glances but otherwise ignored me.

I found the duffel and, as promised, there were clothes and dental-hygiene stuff and soap.

I glanced around the bunkroom and saw through a doorway into a locker room.

I used the bathroom (or "head"

I guess, because I was on a ship).

Then I took a shower with three other guys.

I dried off and put on the jumpsuit onesie Stratt had left me.

It was bright yellow, had Chinese writing along the back, and a big red stripe down the left leg of the pants.

My guess was to make sure everyone knew I was a foreign civilian and not allowed in certain places.

I flagged down a passing sailor and showed him the note.

He nodded and gestured for me to follow.

He led me through a maze of twisty little passages, all alike, until we arrived back at the room I'd been in the previous day.

I stepped in to see Stratt and some of her...teammates?

A subset of the previous day's gang.

Just Minister Voigt, the Chinese scientist-I think her name was Xi-and a guy in a Russian military uniform.

The Russian had been there the previous day but hadn't said anything.

They all looked deep in concentration and the table was littered with paper.

They mumbled to one another here and there.

I didn't know the exact relationships going on, but Stratt was definitely at the head of the table.

She looked up as I entered.

"Ah.

Dr.

Grace.

You look refreshed."

She gestured to her left.

"There's food on the credenza."

And there was!

Rice, steamed buns, deep-fried dough sticks, and an urn of coffee.

I rushed over and helped myself.

I was hungry as heck.

I sat at the conference table with a full plate and cup of coffee.

"So,"

I said with a mouth full of rice.

"You gonna tell me why we're on a Chinese aircraft carrier?"

"I needed an aircraft carrier.

The Chinese gave me one.

Well, they lent it to me."

I slurped my coffee.

"There was a time when something like that would surprise me.

But...you know...not anymore."

"Commercial air travel takes too long and is prone to delays,"

she said.

"Military aircraft work on whatever schedule they want and travel supersonically.

I need to be able to get experts from anywhere on Earth in the same room with no delays."

"Ms.

Stratt can be extremely persuasive,"

said Minister Voigt.

I shoveled more food into my mouth.

"Blame whoever gave her all that authority,"

I said.

Voigt chuckled.

"I was part of that decision, actually.

I am Germany's minister of foreign affairs.

The equivalent of your country's secretary of state."

I paused my chewing.

"Wow,"

I managed to say.

I gulped down the mouthful.

"You're the most high-ranking person I've ever met."

"No, I'm not."

He pointed to Stratt.

She put a piece of paper in front of me.

"This is what led to the Hail Mary Project."

"You're showing him?"

Voigt said.

"Now?

Without getting him a clearance-"

Stratt put her hand on my shoulder.

"Dr.

Ryland Grace, I hereby grant you top-secret clearance to all information pertaining to Project Hail Mary."

"That's not what I meant,"

Voigt said.

"There are processes and background checks to-"

"No time,"

Stratt said.

"No time for any of that stuff.

That's why you put me in charge.

Speed."

She turned toward me and tapped the paper: "These are readings from amateur astronomers all over the world.

They show something very important."

The page had columns of numbers.

I noticed the column titles: "Alpha Centauri,"

"Sirius,"

"Luyten 726-8,"

and so on.

"Stars?"

I said.

"These are all stars in our local cluster.

And wait-did you say amateur astronomers?

If you can tell the German minister of foreign affairs what to do, why don't you have professional astronomers working for you?"

"I do,"

Stratt said.

"But this is historical data collected over the past several years.

Professional astronomers don't study local stars.

They look at faraway things.

It's the amateurs who log data on local stuff.

Like train spotters.

Hobbyists in their backyards.

Some of them with tens of thousands of dollars' worth of equipment."

I picked up the paper.

"Okay, so what am I looking at?"

"Luminosity readings.

Normalized across thousands of amateur-generated data sets and corrected for known weather and visibility conditions.

Supercomputers were involved.

The point is this: Our sun is not the only star that's getting dimmer."

"Really?"

I said.

"Ohhh!

That makes perfect sense!

Astrophage can travel at 0.92 times the speed of light.

If it can go dormant and stay alive long enough, it could infect nearby stars.

It spores!

Just like mold!

It spreads from star to star."

"That's our theory, yes,"

said Stratt.

"This data goes back decades.

It's not deeply reliable but the trends are there.

The NSA back-calculated that-"

"Wait.

NSA?

The U.S.

National Security Agency?"

"They have some of the best supercomputers in the world.

I needed their supercomputers and engineers to try all kinds of scenarios and propagation models for how Astrophage could get around in the galaxy.

Back to the point: These local stars have been dimming for decades.

And the rate of dimming increases exponentially-just like we're seeing with the sun."

She handed me another piece of paper.

It had a bunch of dots connected by lines.

Above each dot was a star name.

"Owing to the speed of light, our observations of the dimming had to be adjusted for the distances of the stars and whatnot, but there's a clear pattern of 'infection' from star to star.

We know when each star was infected and by which infected star.

Our sun was infected by a star called WISE 08550714.

That star was infected by Sirius, which was infected by Epsilon Eridani.

From there, the trail goes cold."

I peered at the chart.

"Huh.

WISE 08550714 also infected Wolf 359, Lalande 21185, and Ross 128."

"Yes, every star eventually infects all of its neighbors.

Judging from our data, we think Astrophage has a maximum range of just under eight light-years.

Any star within that range of an infected star will eventually be infected."

I looked at the data.

"Why eight light-years?

Why not more?

Or less?"

"Our best guess is the Astrophage can only survive so long without a star and it can coast about eight light-years in that time."

"That's sensible, from an evolution point of view,"

I said.

"Most stars have another star within eight light-years, so that's as far as Astrophage had to evolve to travel while sporing."

"Probably,"

Stratt said.

"Nobody noticed those stars getting dimmer?"

I said.

"They only get to about ten percent dimmer before they stop dimming.

We don't know why.

It's not obvious to the naked eye, but-"

"But if our sun dims by ten percent, we're all dead,"

I said.

"Pretty much."

Xi leaned forward on the table.

Her posture was extremely proper.

"Ms.

Stratt has not told you the most important part yet."

The Russian nodded.

It was the first time I'd seen him move at all.

Xi continued.

"Do you know what Tau Ceti is?"

"Do I know?"

I said.

"I mean-I know it's a star.

It's about twelve light-years away, I think."

"Eleven point nine,"

said Xi.

"Very good.

Most would not know that."

"I teach junior high school science,"

I said.

"These things come up."

Xi and the Russian shot each other surprised looks.

Then they both looked at Stratt.

Stratt stared them down.

"There's more to him than that."

Xi regained her composure (not that she'd lost much of it anyway).

"Ahem.

In any event, Tau Ceti is very much inside the cluster of infected stars.

In fact, it is near the center."

"Okay,"

I said.

"I'm sensing there's something special about it?"

"It is not infected,"

Xi said.

"Every star around it is.

There are two very infected stars well within eight light-years of Tau Ceti, yet it remains unaffected."

"Why?"

Stratt shuffled through her papers.

"That's what we want to find out.

So we're going to make a ship and send it there."

I snorted.

"You can't just 'make' an interstellar ship.

We don't have the technology.

We don't have anything close to the technology."

The Russian spoke for the first time.

"Actually, my friend, we do."

Stratt gestured to the Russian.

"Dr.

Komorov is-"

"Please call me Dimitri,"

he said.

"Dimitri heads up the Russian Federation's research into Astrophage,"

she said.

"It is pleasure to meet you,"

he said.

"I am happy to report that we can actually make interstellar voyage."

"No, we can't,"

I said.

"Unless you've got an alien spaceship you never told anyone about."

"In a way, we do,"

he said.

"We have many alien spaceships.

We call them Astrophage.

You see?

My group has studied the energy management of Astrophage.

It is very interesting."

I suddenly forgot everything else going on in the room.

"Oh God, please tell me you understand where the heat goes.

I can't figure out what the heck it's doing with the heat energy!"

"We have figured this out, yes,"

said Dimitri.

"With lasers.

It was very illuminating experiment."

"Was that a pun?"

"It was!"

"Good one!"

We both laughed.

Stratt glared at us.

Dimitri cleared his throat.

"Er...yes.

We pointed tight-focus one-kilowatt laser at a single Astrophage cell.

As usual, it did not get hotter.

But after twenty-five minutes, light starts to bounce off.

Our little Astrophage is full.

Good meal.

It consumed 1.5 megajoules of light energy.

Does not want more.

But this is very much energy!

Where does it put all this energy?"

I'm leaning way too far forward over the table, but I can't help myself.

"Where?!"

"We measure Astrophage cell before and after experiment, of course."

"Of course."

"Astrophage cell is now seventeen nanograms heavier.

You can see where this goes, yes?"

"No, it can't be.

It must have gained that weight from reactions with the air or something."

"No, it was in a vacuum for the test, of course."

"Oh my God."

I was giddy.

"Seventeen nanograms...times nine times ten to the sixteenth...1.5 megajoules!"

I flopped back into my chair.

"Holy...I mean just...wow!"

"This was how I felt, yes."

Mass conversion.

As the great Albert Einstein once said: E = mc2.

There's an absurd amount of energy in mass.

A modern nuclear plant can power an entire city for a year with the energy stored in just one kilogram of Uranium.

Yes.

That's it.

The entire output of a nuclear reactor for a year comes from a single kilogram of mass.

Astrophage can, apparently, do this in either direction.

It takes heat energy and somehow turns it into mass.

Then when it wants the energy back, it turns that mass back into energy-in the form of Petrova-frequency light.

And it uses that to propel itself along in space.

So not only is it a perfect energy-storage medium, it's a perfect spaceship engine.

Evolution can be insanely effective when you leave it alone for a few billion years.

I rub my head.

"This is just crazy.

In a good way, though.

Is it internally producing antimatter, you think?

Something like that?"

"We do not know.

But it definitely increases in mass.

And then, after using light as thrust, it loses mass appropriate to energy released."

"That's...!

Dimitri, I want to hang out with you.

Like-can we hang out?

I'll buy you a beer.

Or vodka.

Or anything.

I bet there's an officers' club on this boat, right?"

"It would be my pleasure."

"Glad you're making friends,"

said Stratt.

"But you've got a lot of work to do before you start hitting the bars."

"Me?

What do I have to do?"

"You need to design and create an Astrophage-breeding facility."

I blinked.

Then I shot to my feet.

"You're going to make an Astrophage-powered ship!"

They all nodded.

"Holy cow!

It's the most efficient rocket fuel ever!

How much would we need to-oh.

Two million kilograms, right?

That's why you wanted to know how long it would take to make that much?"

"Yes,"

said Xi.

"For a one hundred thousand kilogram ship, we would need two million kilograms of Astrophage to get it to Tau Ceti.

And, thanks to you, we now know how to activate the Astrophage and make it generate thrust at will."

I sat back down, pulled out my phone, and launched the calculator app.

"This would take, like...a lot of energy.

Like, more energy than the world has.

It would be around ten to the twenty-third Joules.

The largest nuclear reactor on Earth makes about eight gigawatts.

It would take that reactor two million years to create that much energy."

"We have ideas for finding the energy,"

said Stratt.

"Your job is to make the breeder.

Start small and get a prototype going."

"Okay, sure,"

I said.

"But I didn't exactly love the 'militaries of the world' grand tour on the way here.

Can I take a passenger jet home?

Coach is fine."

"You are home,"

said Stratt.

"The flight hangar is empty.

Just tell me what you need-including staff-and I'll make it happen."

I looked at the others in the conference room.

Xi, Voigt, and Dimitri all nodded.

Yes, this was real.

No, Stratt wasn't kidding.

"Why?!"

I demanded.

"Why the heck can't you just be normal, Stratt?!

If you want fast military transport, well, okay, but why not just work at an air base or something sane people would do?!"

"Because we'll be experimenting with a bunch of Astrophage once we breed it up.

And if we accidentally activate even a couple of kilograms of that stuff, the resulting explosion will be bigger than the largest nuclear bomb ever made."

"Tsar Bomba,"

said Dimitri.

"Made by my country.

Fifty megatons.

Boom."

Stratt continued.

"So we'd rather be out in the middle of the ocean where we won't eradicate any cities."

"Oh,"

I said.

"And as we get more and more Astrophage, we'll go further and further out to sea.

Anyway.

Head down to the hangar deck.

I have carpenters building accommodations and offices as we speak.

Pick some you like and lay claim."

"This is our life now,"

said Dimitri.

"Welcome."

O kay, if I'm going to die, it's going to have meaning.

I'm going to figure out what can be done to stop Astrophage.

And then I'll send my answers off to Earth.

And then...I'll die.

There are lots of avenues for painless suicide here-from overdosing on meds to reducing the oxygen until I fall asleep and die.

Cheerful thought.

I eat a delicious tube of "Day 4-Meal 2."

I think it's beef- flavored.

The food is getting chunkier now.

There are actually some solids in there.

I think I'm chewing on a little cube of carrot.

It's nice to feel some texture in the food for a change.

"More water!"

I say.

The NannyBot (as I've come to call it) quickly takes my plastic cup away and replaces it with a full one.

It's funny.

Three days ago those ceiling-mounted arms were a mechanical monster that haunted me.

Now they're just...there.

Part of life.

I've found the dormitory to be a good place for thinking.

Now that the dead bodies are gone, anyway.

The lab doesn't have anywhere comfortable to relax.

The control room has a nice chair, but it's cramped and has blinking lights everywhere.

But the dormitory has my nice, comfortable bed I can lie back on while I think about what to do next.

Plus, the bedroom is where all the food comes from.

I remembered a lot over the past couple of days.

Looks like Project Hail Mary was a success, because here I am, in another star system.

Tau Ceti, I assume.

It makes sense that I'd mistake it for the sun.

Tau Ceti is very similar to the sun as stars go.

Same spectral type, color, and so on.

And I know why I'm here!

Not just in vague terms like "Oh hey, the world's ending.

Make that not happen."

But very specifically: Find out why Tau Ceti wasn't affected by Astrophage.

Easy to say.

Hard to do.

Hopefully I remember more details later.

A million questions run through my mind.

Some of the most important are: 1.

How do I scour an entire solar system for information about Astrophage?

2.

What am I supposed to do?

Throw some of my Astrophage fuel at Tau Ceti to see what happens?

3.

How do I steer this ship anyway?

4.

If I do find useful information, how do I tell Earth about it?

I think that's what the beetles are for, but how do I upload data to them?

How do I aim them?

How do I launch them?

5.

Why would I, of all people, be part of this mission?

Yes, I worked out a bunch of stuff about Astrophage, but so what?

I'm a lab coat, not an astronaut.

It's not like they sent Wernher von Braun into space.

Surely there were more qualified people.

I decide to start small.

First I have to work out what this ship can do and how to control it.

They put the crew in comas.

They must have known it might mess with our minds.

There has to be an instruction manual somewhere.

"Flight manual,"

I say out loud.

"Ship information can be found in the control room,"

says the NannyBot.

"Where?"

"Ship information can be found in the control room."

"No.

Where in the control room can ship information be found?"

"Ship information can be found in the control room."

"You kind of suck,"

I say.

I make my way up to the control room and take a good long look at every screen.

I spend an hour in there cataloging what each area seems to say, and make guesses as to what the functions are.

What I'm really looking for is something like "Information"

or "Here to save humanity?

Press this button to learn more!"

No such luck.

After hours of poking at screens, I've found nothing.

I guess they figured if the crew are so brain-mushy that they don't remember how to use the ship, they're probably not useful as scientists anyway.

I did find out that any screen can show any instrument panel.

They're pretty much interchangeable.

Just tap the upper-left corner and a menu shows up.

Pick whatever panel you like.

That's nice.

You can customize what you're looking at.

And the screen directly in front of the pilot's seat is the largest.

I decide on a more tactile approach: I'm gonna start pushing buttons!

Hopefully there's no "Blow Up the Ship"

button.

I think Stratt would have kept that from happening.

Stratt.

I wonder what she's doing right now.

Probably in a control room somewhere with the pope making her a cup of coffee.

She was (is?) a really domineering person.

But gosh darn it, I'm glad she was in charge of making this ship happen.

Now that I'm aboard it and all.

Her attention to detail and insistence on perfection are nice to have all around me.

Anyway, I bring up the "Scientific Instrumentation"

panel on the main screen.

It's the same panel I spent a lot of quality time with earlier-the one that currently shows an image of Tau Ceti.

It has the word "Helioscope"

in the upper-left corner.

I hadn't noticed that before.

The left side of the screen has a bunch of icons.

Other equipment, I assume.

I press one at random.

Tau Ceti disappears.

The top-left corner changes to read "External Collection Unit."

The screen shows a diagram of a featureless rectangle.

There are some controls here and there to change the angle and to "open bow side"

and "open stern side."

Okay.

Noted.

Not sure what to do with that information.

I press another icon at random.

This time it changes to "Petrovascope."

Beyond that, there's just a black screen with an error message: .

"Hmph,"

I say.

Okay, what's a Petrovascope?

Best guess: a telescope and/or camera that looks specifically for the IR light that Astrophage emit.

It looks for the Petrova line via the Petrova wavelength so it's a Petrovascope and we really need to stop putting "Petrova"

in front of everything.

Why can't I use it when the spin drive is active?

I don't how a spin drive works, or why it's called a spin drive, but I do know I have one in the back of the ship and it's consuming Astrophage as fuel.

So it's my engine.

It probably activates enriched Astrophage to use them as thrust.

Ah...that would mean there's a ridiculous amount of IR light coming out the back of the ship right now.

Like...enough to vaporize a battleship or something.

I'd have to do the math to know for sure but-I can't help it, I want to do the math right now.

The engines consume 6 grams of Astrophage per second.

Astrophage stores energy as mass.

So basically, the spin drive converts 6 grams of mass into pure energy every second and spits it out the back.

Well, it's the Astrophage doing the work, but whatever.

I bring up the "Utility"

panel on a smaller screen to my right.

It has a bunch of familiar applications, all ready to go.

One of them is a calculator.

I use it to calculate the mass-conversion energy of that 6 grams...good Lord.

It's 540 trillion Joules.

And the ship is emitting that much energy every second.

So it's 540 trillion watts.

I can't even fathom that amount of energy.

It's considerably more than the surface of the sun.

Literally.

Like...

you would get hit by less energy if you were on the surface of the sun than if you were standing behind the Hail Mary at full thrust.

I'm decelerating right now.

Have to be.

The plan is to come to rest in the Tau Ceti system.

So I'm probably pointed away from the star and slowing down-having spent a really long time at near light speed during the trip.

Okay, so all that light energy will hit dust particles, ions, and anything else between me at Tau Ceti as I plug along.

Those poor little particles will be brutally vaporized.

And that'll scatter some IR light back at the ship.

Not much compared to the engine output, but it would be blinding to the Petrovascope, which is finely tuned to look for trace amounts of that exact frequency.

So no using the Petrovascope with the engine on.

But man.

I would love to know if Tau Ceti has a Petrova line.

Theoretically, any star infected with Astrophage should have one, right?

The little blighters need carbon dioxide to breed.

Can't get that from the star (unless you go way into the core, and I don't know if even Astrophage could survive those temperatures).

If I see a Petrova line, it means that Tau Ceti has an active Astrophage population that, for some reason, hasn't grown out of control like it has everywhere else.

And that line will lead to a planet that has carbon dioxide.

Maybe there's some other chemical in that atmosphere that impedes the Astrophage?

Maybe the planet has a weird magnetic field that messes with their ability to navigate?

Maybe the planet has a bunch of moons that the Astrophage physically collides with?

Maybe Tau Ceti just doesn't have any planets with carbon dioxide in their atmospheres.

That would suck.

It would mean this whole trip was for nothing and Earth is doomed.

I could speculate all day.

Without data, it's just pure guesswork.

And without the Petrovascope, I don't have data.

At least, not the data I want.

I turn my attention to the Navigation screen.

Should I mess with it?

I mean-I don't know how to fly this ship.

The ship does, but I don't.

If I push the wrong button, I'll be dead in space.

Actually, it would be worse than that.

I'd be hurtling toward Tau Ceti at-I check the info on-screen-7,595 kilometers per second.

Wow!

A couple days ago, that was over 11,000.

That's what constantly accelerating at 1.5 g's will do for you.

Or "decelerating,"

I guess.

From a physics standpoint it's all the same.

Point is, I'm slowing down with respect to the star.

There's a button on-screen that just says "Course."

That seems reasonable to tap, right?

Famous last words.

Really I should just wait until the computer feels like the trip is done.

But I can't help myself.

I tap the button.

The screen changes to show the Tau Ceti solar system.

Tau Ceti itself sits at the center, denoted with the Greek letter tau.

Ohhhh...that's what the lowercase t is on the Hail Mary crest.

It's a tau, for "Tau Ceti."

Okay.

Anyway, four planetary orbits are shown as thin white ellipses around the star.

The locations of the planets themselves are shown as circles with error bars.

We don't have super-accurate information on exoplanets.

If I could figure out how to get the science instruments working, I could probably get much better info on those planet locations.

I'm twelve light-years closer to them than astronomers on Earth.

A yellow line runs almost directly into the system from off- screen.

It bends toward the star somewhere between the third and fourth planets and into a circle.

There's a yellow triangle on the line, way far away from the four planets.

Pretty sure that's me.

And the yellow line is my course.

Above the map is the text: TIME TO ENGINE CUTOFF: 0005:20:39:06 The final digit decrements once per second.

Okay, I learned a couple of things here.

First off, I have about five days left (closer to six) before the engine cuts off.

Second off, the readout has four digits for days.

That means this journey took at least one thousand days.

Over three years.

Well, it takes light twelve years to make this trip, so it should take me a long time too.

Oh, right.

Relativity.

I have no idea how much time it took.

Or, rather, I have no idea how much time I experienced.

When you get going near the speed of light, you experience time dilation.

More time will have gone by on Earth than I have experienced since I left Earth.

Relativity is weird.

Time is of the essence here.

And unfortunately, while I slept, Earth experienced at least thirteen years.

And even if I find a solution to the Astrophage problem right now, it would take at least thirteen years for that information to get back to Earth.

So that means there'll be an absolute minimum of twenty-six years of Astrophage misery on Earth.

I can only hope they are coming up with ways to deal with it.

Or at least ameliorate the damage.

I mean, they wouldn't have sent the Hail Mary out at all if they didn't think they could survive at least twenty-six years, right?

In any event, the trip took at least three years (from my point of view).

Is that why we were put in comas?

Was there a problem with us just being awake for the duration?

I only notice the tears when the first of them drops off my face.

That decision to put us in comas killed two close friends of mine.

They're gone.

I don't remember a single moment with either of them, but the feeling of loss is overwhelming.

I'll be joining them soon.

There's no way home.

I'll die out here too.

But unlike them, I'll die alone.

I wipe my eyes and try to think of other things.

My whole species is at stake here.

Judging by the path on the map, the ship will automatically put me in a stable orbit around Tau Ceti, between the third and fourth planets.

If I had to guess, I would say that's probably 1 AU.

The distance that Earth is from the sun.

A nice, safe distance from the star.

A slow orbit that takes about a year to complete.

Probably longer, because Tau Ceti is smaller than the sun, so it probably has less mass.

Less mass means less gravity and a slower orbital period at a given distance.

Okay, I have five days to kill until engine cutoff.

Rather than mess around with stuff, I'll just wait it out.

Once the engines are off, I'll fire up the Petrovascope and see what's out there.

Until then, I'll try to learn as much about the ship as I can.

I'll do just about anything right now to keep from thinking about Yo and Ilyukhina.

- Technically the carrier was named the People's Liberation Army Navy Gansu.

Why their navy has "Army"

in its name I'll never know.

Regardless, people stopped calling it that and started calling it Stratt's Vat.

Despite objections from the sailors aboard, the name stuck.

We wandered around the South China Sea, never getting too close to land.

I'd spent a blissful week doing nothing but science.

No meetings.

No distractions.

Just experimentation and engineering.

I'd forgotten how much fun it was to get immersed in a task.

My first breeder prototype had demonstrated another successful run.

It wasn't much to look at-mostly a 30-foot-long metal pipe with a bunch of ugly control equipment welded on here and there.

But it did the trick.

It could only generate a few micrograms of Astrophage per hour, but the concept was solid.

I had a staff of twelve people-engineers from all over the world.

A couple of Mongolian brothers were my best engineers.

When I got a call from Stratt to meet her in the conference room, I left them in charge.

I found her alone in the meeting room.

The table was strewn with papers and charts, like always.

Graphs and diagrams adorned all the walls-some new, some old.

Stratt sat at one end of the long table, with a bottle of Dutch gin and a lowball glass.

I'd never seen her drink before.

"You wanted to see me?"

I said.

She looked up.

Her eyes had bags.

She hadn't slept.

"Yeah.

Have a seat."

I sat in the chair next to her.

"You look terrible.

What's going on?"

"I have to make a decision.

And it's not easy."

"How can I help?"

She offered me the gin.

I shook my head.

She topped off her own glass.

"The Hail Mary is going to have a very small crew compartment-about 125 cubic meters."

I cocked my head.

"That's actually kind of big as spaceships go, right?"

She wiggled her hand back and forth.

"Big for a capsule like Soyuz or Orion.

But tiny for a space station.

It's about one-tenth as big as the International Space Station's crew compartment."

"Okay,"

I said.

"What's the problem?"

"The problem"-she picked up a manila folder and dropped it in front of me-"is that the crew will kill each other."

"Huh?"

I opened the folder.

Inside were lots of typewritten pages.

Actually, they were scans of typed pages.

Some were in English, some in Russian.

"What is all this?"

"During the Space Race, the Soviets briefly set their sights on Mars.

They figured if they put people on Mars, the U.S.

moon landing would be trivial in comparison."

I closed the folder.

The Cyrillic writing was nonsense to me.

But my guess was Stratt could read it.

She always seemed to know whatever language was being used.

She rested her chin on her hands.

"Getting to Mars with 1970s technology would mean using a Hohmann transfer trajectory, which means the crew would have to spend just over eight months aboard a ship.

So the Soviets tested out what happens when you put people together in a cramped, isolated environment for several months."

"And?"

"After seventy-one days, the men inside were getting in fistfights every day.

They stopped the experiment on day ninety- four because one of the subjects tried to stab another one to death with broken glass."

"How big will the crew be for the mission?"

"The current plan is three,"

she said.

"Okay,"

I said.

"So you're worried what happens when we send three astronauts on a four-year trip in a 125-cubic-meter compartment?"

"It's not just about them getting along.

Each crew member would spend the whole trip knowing that they're going to die in a few years.

And that the few rooms on that ship are the only world they will know for the rest of their short lives.

The psychiatrists I've talked to say that crushing depression is likely.

And suicide is a real risk."

"Yeah, that is some rough psychology,"

I said.

"But what else can we do?"

She picked up a stapled sheaf of papers and slid it toward me.

I picked it up and read the title: "A Study of Long-Term Primate and Human Coma Patients and Detrimental Aftereffects-Srisuk et al."

"Okay.

What am I looking at here?"

"That's a study by a failed company in Thailand."

She swirled the gin in her glass.

"Their idea was to put cancer patients into induced comas for their chemotherapy treatments.

The patient gets the chemo, but doesn't have to be awake to suffer through the process.

Wake them up when the cancer goes into remission.

Or when it's no longer treatable and it's time for hospice.

Either way, they skip a lot of misery."

"That...sounds like a great idea,"

I said.

She nodded.

"It would be, if it wasn't so lethal.

Turns out the human body just isn't supposed to be in a coma for a long time.

Chemo lasts months, and often needs additional rounds after that.

They tried various means for medically induced comas on primates, and the primates either died during the coma or came out of it with mush for brains."

"So why are we talking about it?"

"Because they did more studies-this time on historical human coma patient data.

They looked at humans who had come through long comas relatively unscathed and tried to see what they had in common.

They found it."

Old Russian space-agency documents were a mystery to me, but scientific papers were my forte for a long time.

I flipped through the paper and skimmed to the findings.

"Gene markers?"

I said.

"Yes,"

she said.

"They found a collection of genes that give a human 'coma resistance.' That's what they're calling it.

The sequences are in what scientists used to think was junk DNA.

But apparently it's something we evolved a long time ago for some unknown reason and still lurks in some people's genetic code."

"Are they sure these genes cause coma resistance?"

I said.

"They correlate, but do they cause it?"

"Yes, they're sure.

The genes are found in lower primates too.

Whatever it is, it goes way back in the evolutionary tree.

There's speculation it might go all the way back to our aquatic ancestors that used to hibernate.

In any event, they ran tests on primates with those genes and they survived long comas with no side effects.

Every single one of them."

"Okay.

I see where you're going with this."

I put the paper down.

"Do DNA tests on all applicants, and use only the people who have those coma-resistance genes.

During the trip, put the crew in comas.

They don't have to experience four years of getting on each other's nerves or introspection about their deaths."

She raised her glass to me.

"It gets better.

Having the crew in comas makes the food situation much easier.

Powdered, nutritionally balanced slurry pumped right into their stomachs.

No need for a thousand kilograms of diverse meals.

Just powder and a self-contained water-recycling system."

I smiled.

"This seems like a dream come true.

Like suspended animation in sci-fi novels.

Why are you drinking and stressed-out?"

"There are a couple of catches,"

she said.

"First off, we'd have to develop a completely automated monitoring and action system to take care of the coma patients.

If it broke down, everyone would die.

There's more to it than just monitoring vitals and pushing the right drugs through an IV.

It would have to physically move and clean the patients, deal with bedsores, diagnose and treat secondary issues like inflammation and infection around the various IV and probe entry points.

Stuff like that."

"Okay, but that seems like something the global medical community could work out for us,"

I said.

"Use your Stratt magic to boss them around or something."

She took another sip.

"That's not the main problem.

The main problem is this: On average, only one in every seven thousand humans has that genetic sequence."

I sat back in my chair.

"Whoa."

"Yeah.

We wouldn't be able to send the most qualified people.

We'd be sending the seven-thousandth most qualified people."

"Three-thousand-five-hundredth most qualified people on average,"

I said.

She rolled her eyes.

"Still,"

I said.

"One seven-thousandth of the world's population is a million people.

Think of it that way.

You'd have a pool of one million people to look through for candidates.

All you need are three."

"Six,"

she said.

"We need a primary crew and a backup crew.

Can't have the mission fail because some guy gets hit by a car crossing the street the day before launch."

"Okay, then six."

"Yeah.

Six people of astronaut caliber, who have the scientific skills necessary to work out what's going on with Astrophage at Tau Ceti, and who are willing to go on a suicide mission."

"Out of a population of a million,"

I said.

"A million."

She fell silent and took another sip of gin.

I cleared my throat.

"So you either take your chances with picking the best possible candidates and maybe they kill each other, or you take your chances on yet-to-be-developed medical technology to automatically care for a lower tier of talent."

"More or less.

Either way, it's a terrible risk.

It's the hardest decision I've ever had to make."

"Good thing you already made up your mind, then,"

I said.

She raised an eyebrow.

"Huh?"

"Sure,"

I said.

"You just wanted someone to tell you what you already know.

If you leave the crew awake, there's nothing you can do about the psychosis risk.

But we've got years to perfect the automated-coma-bed technology."

She scowled a bit but didn't speak.

I softened my voice.

"Besides.

We're already asking these people to die.

We shouldn't ask them to suffer emotional torment for four years too.

Science and morality both give the same answer here, and you know it."

She nodded, almost imperceptibly.

Then, she downed the rest of her gin.

"All right.

You can go."

She slid her laptop over and began typing.

I left without another word.

She had her stuff to deal with and I had mine.

- The memories are coming back more smoothly now.

I still can't remember everything, but it's no longer an epiphany when they happen.

It's just sort of..."Oh hey, I know that.

Always knew it, really."

I guess I'm one of those people with coma resistance.

That explains why I'm here instead of any of the far more qualified candidates that should have been sent.

But Yo and Ilyukhina probably had those genes, too, and they didn't make it.

My guess is the medical robot wasn't perfect.

They must have had some medical situation arise it couldn't figure out.

I shake off their memory.

The next several days are an exercise in patience.

I learn more about the ship to distract myself.

I catalog the entire lab.

One of the first things I find is a touchscreen computer in a pull-out drawer in the center table.

It's actually a fantastic find, because it has a bunch of research- related screens.

As opposed to the panels in the control room, which are all about the ship or its instruments.

I see a bunch of math and science apps-most of which are off-the-shelf that I'm familiar with.

But the real boon is the library!

As far as I can tell, this panel can bring up literally any scientific textbook ever written, every scientific paper ever published on any topic, and a whole lot more.

There's one the entire digital catalog of everything that's ever been Mary, unfortunately.

And the reference manuals.

So many reference manuals.

Data on top of data with data in between.

I guess they figured solid- state hard drives are light, so there was no reason to be stingy with information.

Heck, they may have just burned the data into ROMs.

They gave me reference material on stuff that can't possibly be useful.

But hey, it's nice to know that if I need the average rectal temperature of a healthy goat, I can find that out!

(It's 103.4F / 39.7C.) Playing with the panel leads to my next discovery: I know how I'll report back to Earth with the beetles.

I knew they'd be involved, but now I know specifics.

In addition to the absurd data storage array aboard the ship, the panel also has four comparatively small external drives mounted: John, Paul, George, and Ringo.

Each one of those shows 5 terabytes free.

It's not a huge leap to assume that's the beetle's data.

So how do I launch them when the time comes?

To find out, I head to the control room.

I have to dig through a few layers of UI on the Beetles panel to find the launch command, but I find it.

As far as I can tell, it's just a button labeled "Launch."

I guess they orient themselves based on stars and head toward Earth on their own.

The Hail Mary did the same thing to get here, so they know how to do it.

No reason to introduce human error in the course selection.

While I'm here, I poke around the Scientific Instrumentation screen.

The first few subwindows are the helioscope, the Petrovascope, and a telescope that can see in the visible spectrum, IR spectrum, and a bunch of other bands.

I play with the visible-light telescope.

It's kind of fun.

I can look at the stars.

I mean, there's nothing else out there.

Even Tau Ceti's planets would just be little dots from where I am.

But it's still nice to see the outside from my confined little world.

I also found a dedicated EVA screen.

It has more or less what I would have expected.

There are a bunch of controls for the EVA suit itself, so an operator in the control room can manage any issue with the suit during an EVA.

That way, the person in the suit doesn't have to deal with it.

Plus, it looks like the ship has a complicated tethering system on the hull.

Basically a bunch of tracks that the tether hook can run along.

They really figured an EVA would be important.

Probably to collect local Astrophage.

If there is any.

If Tau Ceti has a Petrova line, then there's Astrophage to be collected.

Getting ahold of some would be step one.

Getting that down to the lab, and seeing if it differs from the Astrophage on Earth.

Maybe it's a less virulent strain?

The next two days are, basically, me worrying about what happens next.

Oh, I know what happens next-I'm just worrying about it anyway.

I fidget in the control room and watch the seconds tick away.

"You're going to be in zero g,"

I say.

"You are not going to be falling.

You will not be in danger.

The acceleration of the ship will stop.

But that's okay."

I don't like roller coasters or water slides.

That dropping sensation scares the pants off me.

And in a few seconds I'm going to feel that exact sensation because the "gravity"

I've been experiencing will stop altogether.

The seconds tick off.

"Four...three...two..."

"Here we go,"

I said.

"One...zero."

Right on schedule, the engines shut off.

The 1.5 g's I've been feeling all this time vanishes.

Gravity is gone.

I panic.

No amount of mental preparation would have worked.

I straight-up panic.

I scream and flail around.

I force myself to curl into a fetal position-it's comforting and keeps me from hitting any controls or screens.

I shiver and shake as I float around the control room.

I should have strapped myself to the chair, but I didn't think to.

Dummy.

"I'm not falling!"

I scream.

"I'm not falling!

This is just space!

Everything is fine!"

It's not fine.

I feel my stomach in my throat.

I'm going to puke.

Puke in zero g is not okay.

I don't have a bag.

I severely underprepared for this.

I was stupid to think I could just talk myself out of a primal fear.

I pull the collar of my jumpsuit open and tilt my head down.

I'm just in the nick of time.

I puke out the entirety of "Day 9- Meal 3"

into my shirt.

I hold the collar tight to my chest afterward.

It's disgusting, but contained.

Better than letting it float around the control room and becoming a choking hazard.

"Oh gosh..."

I whimper.

"Gosh...this is..."

Can I do this?

Will I be rendered completely worthless from this point on?

Will humanity die because I can't handle zero g?

No.

I clench my teeth.

I clench my fists.

I clench my butt.

I clench every part of me that I know how to clench.

It gives me a feeling of control.

I'm doing something by aggressively doing nothing.

After an eternity, the panic begins to ebb away.

Human brains are amazing things.

We can get used to just about anything.

I'm making the adjustment.

The slight reduction of fear has a feedback effect.

I know I will get less afraid now.

And knowing that makes the fear subside even faster.

Soon, the panic dies down to fear, which diffuses into general anxiousness.

I look around the control room and nothing seems right.

Nothing changed, but now there's no down.

I still feel sick to my stomach.

I grab my collar in case I need to puke again but it isn't necessary.

I hold it in.

The feeling of warm vomit squishing between my chest and jumpsuit is disgusting.

I need to change.

I aim myself at the hatchway leading to the lab and kick off the bulkhead behind me.

I float down and into the lab.

The whole room is cluttered with random floating debris.

I left things out on the table when I cataloged them.

Now all that stuff is wandering around freely, wafted along by currents from the life-support air vents.

"Dummy,"

I say to myself.

I really should have seen that coming.

I continue onward to the bedroom.

Not surprisingly, it's also got junk floating everywhere.

I opened most of the bins in the storage area to see what was inside.

Now the bins and their contents drift to and fro.

"Clean me!"

I say to the arms.

The arms don't do anything.

I strip down and use the jumpsuit to wipe gross stuff from my body.

I found the sponge-bath zone a few days ago-just a sink with sponges that comes out of the wall.

No room for a shower, I guess.

Anyway, I clean up with that stuff.

I'm not sure what to do with the gross, dirty stuff.

"Laundry?"

I say.

The arms reach down and take the dirty jumpsuit from my hands.

A panel in the ceiling opens and they put it in there somewhere.

What happens when that fills up?

No idea.

I find a replacement jumpsuit in the flotsam and put it on.

Putting on clothes in zero g is interesting.

I wouldn't say it's harder, but it's different.

I do manage to get the new jumpsuit on.

It's a little tight.

I check the name patch.

It says .

It's one of Yo's jumpsuits.

Well, it's not too tight.

And I don't want to bounce around the bedroom all day looking for one of mine.

I'll organize it all later.

For now, I'm too excited to see what's out there.

I mean, come on!

I'm the first human to explore another star system!

And I'm here!

I launch off the floor toward the hatchway...and miss.

I crash into the ceiling.

At least I get my arms up in time to protect my face.

I bounce off the ceiling and back to the floor.

"Ow,"

I mumble.

I try again, this time a little more slowly, and I'm successful.

I coast up through the lab, and into the control room.

Getting around sure is a lot easier when there's no gravity.

I still feel queasy but I have to admit: This is pretty fun.

I pull myself into the pilot's chair and strap myself in to keep from floating away.

The Navigation screen reads .

The Spin Drive screen says : 0.

But most important, the Petrovascope screen says .

I rub my hands together, then reach for the screen.

The interface is simple enough.

The corner has an icon that is a toggle switch with two states: "Visible"

and "Petrova."

It's currently set to "Visible."

The rest of the screen shows a visible- light view from the ship.

Seems like an ordinary camera.

I poke at the screen and quickly realize I can pan, zoom in or out, rotate, and so on.

All I see is stars in the distance.

I guess I should pan around until I find Tau Ceti.

I swipe my finger left, left, left...just generally trying to see where the star is.

I don't have a frame of reference to work with.

Every few left swipes I throw in a down swipe.

Just to cover all angles over time.

I do finally find Tau Ceti, but it doesn't look like it should.

A few days ago, when I looked at it with the helioscope, it looked like any other star.

But now it's a solid black circle with a hazy ring of light around it.

I realize why immediately.

The Petrovascope is a pretty sensitive piece of equipment.

It's fine-tuned to spot even the smallest amounts of the Petrova wavelength.

A star will give off absolutely obscene amounts of light at all wavelengths.

It'd be like staring at the sun with binoculars.

The equipment has to protect itself from the star.

It probably has a physical metal plate that it keeps between its sensors and the star at all times.

So I'm looking at the back of that plate.

Good design.

I reach up to the toggle switch.

This is it.

If there's no Petrova line here, I don't know what to do.

I mean, I'll try to figure out something.

But I'll be kind of lost.

I flip the toggle.

The stars disappear.

The hazy ring surrounding Tau Ceti remains.

That's to be expected.

It's the star's corona, which will be emitting plenty of light, so some of it's bound to be the Petrova wavelength.

I search the image desperately.

Nothing at first, but then I see it.

A beautiful dark-red arch coming out of the bottom-left portion of Tau Ceti.

I clap my hands.

"Yes!"

The shape is unmistakable.

It's a Petrova line!

Tau Ceti has a Petrova line!

I do a wiggly little dance in my chair.

It's not easy in zero g but I give it my all.

Now we're getting somewhere!

There are so many experiments I'll need to do, I don't even know where to begin.

I should see where the line leads, for starters.

One of the planets, obviously, but which one and what's interesting about it?

And I should get a sample of local Astrophage to see if it's the same as what we have back on Earth.

I could do that by flying into the Petrova line itself and then scraping the dust off the hull with an EVA.

I could spend a week just writing up a list of experiments I want to do!

I spot a flash on the screen.

Just a quick blip of light.

"What's that?"

I say.

"Another clue?"

The flash happens again.

I pan and zoom in on that portion of space.

It's nowhere near the Petrova line or Tau Ceti.

Maybe a reflection from a planet or asteroid?

I can see how that might happen.

A highly reflective asteroid could be bouncing enough light from Tau Ceti around that I see it on the Petrovascope, but it's intermittent, so maybe it's an irregular shape that's rotating and- The flash becomes a solid light source.

It's just..."on"

now.

Nonstop.

I peer at the screen.

"What...what's going on here?..."

The light source becomes brighter.

Not instantly.

Just gradually over time.

I watch for a minute.

It seems to get brighter faster now.

Is it an object headed toward me?

An instant hypothesis pops into my mind: Maybe Astrophage are somehow attracted to other Astrophage?

Maybe some subset of them saw the flare from my engines, which would be the wavelength they use, and they headed toward me.

Maybe this is how they find the main migration group?

So this could be a clump of Astrophage headed my way, thinking I can lead them to the planet with the carbon dioxide?

Interesting theory.

Nothing to back it up, though.

The steady light grows brighter, brighter, brighter, and then finally disappears.

"Huh,"

I say.

I wait a few minutes, but the light does not return.

"Hmm...."

I make a mental note of the anomaly.

But for now there's nothing I can do about it.

Whatever it was, it's gone now.

Back to the Petrova line.

The first thing I want to do is find out which planet the line leads to.

I guess I'll have to work out how to navigate the ship, but that's another challenge.

I pan back to look at the Petrova line.

Something's wrong now.

Half of it is just...gone.

It's coming out of Tau Ceti, just like it was a few minutes ago, but then it stops abruptly at a seemingly arbitrary point in space.

"What is going on?"

Did I mess up their migration pattern, maybe?

If it's that easy, wouldn't we have worked that out when the Hail Mary was wandering around our own solar system?

I zoom in on the cutoff point.

It's just a straight line.

Like someone took an X-Acto knife to the whole Petrova line and threw away the scrap.

A giant line of migrating Astrophage doesn't just disappear.

I have a simpler explanation: There's something on the camera lens.

Some blob of debris.

Maybe a wad of overexcitable Astrophage.

That would be nice.

I'd have a sample to look at right away!

Maybe a visible-light view will give me a better idea of what's going on.

I press the toggle button.

And that's when I see it.

There is an object blocking my view of the Petrova line.

It's right next to my ship.

Maybe a few hundred meters away.

It's roughly triangle-shaped and it has gable-like protrusions along its hull.

Yes.

I said hull.

It's not an asteroid-the lines are too smooth; too straight.

This object was made.

Fabricated.

Constructed.

Shapes like that don't occur in nature.

It's a ship.

Another ship.

There's another ship in this system with me.

Those flashes of light-those were its engines.

It's Astrophage-powered.

Just like the Hail Mary.

But the design, the shape-it's nothing like any spacecraft I've ever seen.

The whole thing is made of huge, flat surfaces-the worst possible way to make a pressure vessel.

No one in their right mind would make a ship that shape.

No one on Earth would, anyway.

I blink a few times at what I'm seeing.

I gulp.

This...this is an alien spacecraft.

Made by aliens.

Aliens intelligent enough to make a spacecraft.

Humanity isn't alone in the universe.

And I've just met our neighbors.

"Holy fucking shit!"

A flood of thoughts hit me all at the same time: We're not alone.

This is an alien.

That ship is weird, how does the engineering of that work?

Do they live here?

Is this their star?

Am I starting an interplanetary incident by wandering into alien territory?!

"Breathe,"

I tell myself.

Okay, one thing at a time.

What if this is another ship from Earth?

One I don't remember?

Heck, it took me a few days to remember my name.

Maybe Earth sent multiple ships with different designs?

Like, for redundancy or to increase the odds that at least one of them works.

Maybe that ship is the Praise Allah or the Blessings of Vishnu or something.

I look all around the control room.

There are screens and controls for everything, but there's nothing for a radio.

The EVA panel has some radio controls, but that's obviously just for talking to crewmates when they're outside.

If they'd sent multiple ships, surely they would have had some radio system so we could talk to each other.

Also, that ship...it's insane.

I cycle through the navigation console screens until I find the Radar panel.

I'd noticed it earlier, but didn't think much of it.

I assume it's there so I can get near asteroids or other objects and not collide with them.

After a few halting attempts, I manage to turn it on.

It immediately spots the other ship and sounds an alarm.

The shrill noise hurts my ears.

"Whoa, whoa, whoa!"

I say.

I frantically scan the panel until I see a button labeled "Mute Proximity Alert."

I press it and the noise stops.

I scan the rest of the screen.

There's a lot of data here, all in a window titled "BLIP-A."

I guess if there were multiple contacts I'd get multiple windows.

Whatever.

It's all just raw numbers about the reading.

Nothing useful like an isometric Star Trek scan or anything.

"Velocity"

is zero.

They have matched my velocity exactly.

That can't be a coincidence.

"Range"

is 217 meters.

I'm assuming that's the distance to the closest part of the other ship.

Or maybe the average.

No, it would be the closest part.

The point of this system is probably to avoid collisions.

Speaking of collisions-217 meters is a ridiculously small distance compared to the size of a solar system.

There's no way this is a coincidence.

That ship positioned itself here on purpose because I'm here.

Another reading, "Angular width,"

is 35.44 degrees.

Okay, some basic math should handle this.

I bring up the Utility panel on the main screen and launch the calculator app.

Something 217 meters away is occupying 35.44 degrees of the view.

Presuming the radar can see in all 360 degrees (it would be a pretty cruddy radar if it couldn't)...I type some numbers into the calculator to do an ARCTAN operation, and: The ship is 139 meters long.

Roughly.

I bring the Astrophage panel up on another screen.

The little map there shows that the Hail Mary is just 47 meters long.

So yeah.

The alien ship is three times the size of mine.

There's just no way Earth sent something that big.

And the shape.

What is up with that shape?

I turn my attention back to the Petrovascope (which is now just acting as a camera).

The center of the ship is diamond-shaped-a rhombus.

Well, I guess it's an octahedron, really.

Looks like it has eight faces, each triangular.

That part alone is about the size of my ship.

The diamond is connected by three thick rods (I don't know what else to call them) to a wide trapezoidal base.

That looks like it might be the rear.

And in front of the diamond is a narrow stalk (just making up terms at this point) that has four flat panels attached parallel to the main ship axis.

Maybe solar panels?

The stalk continues forward to a pyramid-shaped nose cone.

Nose pyramid, I guess.

Every part of the hull is flat.

Even the "rods"

have flat faces.

Why would anyone do that?

Flat panels are a terrible idea.

I don't know anything about who made this, but presumably they need some kind of atmosphere inside, right?

Huge, flat panels are awful at that.

Maybe this is just a probe and not an actual ship.

Maybe there's no atmosphere inside because there's nothing alive inside.

I might be looking at an alien artifact instead of a ship.

Still the most exciting moment in human history.

So it's Astrophage-powered.

That was the steady Petrova- frequency glow I saw earlier.

Interesting that they have the same propulsion tech as we do.

But considering it's the best energy- storage medium possible, that's not a surprise.

When European mariners first came across Asian mariners, no one was surprised they both used sails.

But the "why."

That's what gets me.

Some entity aboard (either a computer or a crew) decided to come to my ship.

How did they even know I was here?

Same way I saw them, I guess.

The massive IR light coming off my engines.

And since the rear of my ship was pointed at Tau Ceti, that means I was shining a 540-trillion-watt flashlight in their direction.

Depending on where they were at the time, I might have appeared even brighter than Tau Ceti itself.

At least, in the Petrova frequency.

So they can see the Petrova frequency.

And so can I.

I flip through the Spin Drive console screens until I find one labeled "Manual Control."

When I select it, a warning dialog pops up: MANUAL CONTROL IS RECOMMENDED ONLY FOR EMERGENCIES.

ARE YOU SURE YOU WANT TO ENTER MANUAL CONTROL MODE?

I tap "Yes."

It brings up another dialog.

SECOND CONFIRMATION: TYPE "Y-E-S"

TO ENTER MANUAL CONTROL MODE.

I groan and type Y-E-S.

The panel finally takes me to the Manual Control screen.

It's a bit scary.

Not because it's complex, but because it's so simple.

There are three sliders labeled "Drive 1,"

"Drive 2,"

and "Drive 3,"

each presently at zero.

The top of each slider is labeled "107 N."

The N must mean "Newtons"-a unit of force.

I guess if I threw all three drives to maximum, it would give me 30 million Newtons.

That's about sixty times the thrust a jumbo jet's engines produce during takeoff.

Science teachers know a lot of random facts.

There are a bunch more little sliders.

In groups labeled "Yaw,"

"Pitch,"

and "Roll."

There must be little spin drives on the sides of the ship to adjust its orientation.

I can definitely see why it's a bad idea to mess with this panel.

One screw-up and I'll put the ship into a spin that tears it apart.

But at least they thought of that.

There's a button in the middle of the screen labeled "Zero All Rotation."

Good.

I check the Petrovascope again.

Blip-A hasn't moved.

It's on my port side, and slightly forward.

I flick the Petrovascope back to Petrova-frequency mode, and the screen turns mostly black.

As before, I can see the Petrova line in the background, occluded by Blip-A.

"Let's see if you have anything to say..."

I mumble.

Spin drive 2 is in the center of the ship.

Its thrust will be along my central axis and hopefully won't introduce attitude change.

We'll see.

I set it to 0.1% power for one second, then back to 0.

Even with just one engine, at one one-thousandth power, for one second, the ship drifts a bit.

The "Velocity"

value for Blip- A on the Radar panel shows 0.086 m/s.

That tiny thrust set my ship moving about 8 centimeters per second.

But I don't care about that.

I care about the other ship.

I watch the Petrovascope.

A bead of sweat separates from my forehead and floats away.

I feel like my heart is going to beat out of my chest.

Then, the rear of the ship lights up in the Petrova frequency for one second.

Just like I did.

"Wow!"

I flick the drive on and off several times: three short bursts, a long one, and one more short one.

There's no message there.

I just want to see what they do with it.

They were more prepared this time.

Within seconds, the other ship repeats the pattern.

I gasp.

And I smile.

Then I wince.

Then I smile again.

This is a lot to take in.

That was too fast for any probe to respond.

If it had remote control or something, the controllers would have to be at least a few light-minutes away-there's just nothing around here that could be housing them.

There is an intelligent life-form aboard that ship.

I am about 200 meters away from an honest-to-God alien!

I mean...my ship is powered by aliens.

But this new one is intelligent!

Oh my gosh!

This is it!

First Contact!

I'm the guy!

I'm the guy who meets aliens for the first time!

The Blip-A (that's what I'm calling their ship for now) fires up its engines again briefly.

I watch closely to memorize the sequence, but it's just a single low-intensity light.

They're not signaling.

They're maneuvering.

I check the Radar panel.

Sure enough, the Blip-A brings itself alongside the Hail Mary and holds position at 217 meters.

I flick through the Scientific panel to bring the normal telescopic cameras back up.

The Petrovascope's normal-light camera is just to orient things for the main scope itself.

The telescope has much better resolution and clarity.

I guess I'm too excited to think clearly because it took me until now to think of it.

The image is far clearer through the main telescope.

I guess it's just an insanely high-resolution camera, because I can still zoom in and out with no loss of clarity.

I have a very good view of the Blip-A now.

The ship's hull is a mottled gray and tan.

The pattern seems random and smooth, like someone started mixing paint but stopped way too early.

I spot motion in the corner of the screen.

An irregular-shaped object slides along a track in the hull.

It's a stalk sticking up with five articulated "arms"

coming out of the top.

Each arm has a clamp-like "hand"

on the end.

It's only now that I notice a network of the tracks all along the hull.

It's a robot.

Something controlled from the inside.

At least, I assume it is.

It doesn't look like a little green man, and it certainly doesn't look like an alien EVA suit.

Not that I have any idea what either of those things would look like.

Yeah, I'm pretty sure that's a hull-mounted robot.

Space stations back at Earth have them.

They're a nice way to do stuff outside your ship without having to suit up.

The robot works its way along the hull until it reaches the spot closest to the Hail Mary.

One of its little clamp hands holds a cylindrical object.

I don't really have a sense of scale, but the robot is tiny compared to the ship.

I feel like it's about my size or maybe smaller, but that's a wild guess.

The robot stops, reaches toward my ship, and gently releases the cylinder into space.

The cylinder moves slowly toward me.

It has a slight rotation, end-over-end.

Not perfect, but still a very smooth release.

I check the Radar panel.

The Blip-A is at velocity zero.

And there's a "Blip-B"

screen now.

It shows the much smaller cylinder approaching at 8.6 centimeters per second.

Interesting.

That's the exact same velocity I moved the Hail Mary a moment ago while flashing the engine to say hi.

That can't be a coincidence.

They want me to have that cylinder, and they want to deliver it to me at a velocity they know I'm comfortable working with.

"Very considerate of you..."

I say.

These are smart aliens.

I have to assume friendly intent at this point.

I mean, they're going out of their way to say hi and be accommodating.

Besides, if there is hostile intent, what would I do about it?

Die.

That's what I'd do.

I'm a scientist, not Buck Rogers.

Well, I mean, I guess I could point the spin drives at their ship, fire them up to full, which would vaporize-you know what?

I'm just not going to think along those lines right now.

Some quick math tells me the cylinder will take over forty minutes to reach me.

I have that long to get in an EVA suit, go outside, and position myself on the hull for humanity's first touchdown-pass reception with an alien quarterback.

I learned a lot about the airlock when I was giving my crewmates a burial in space and- Ilyukhina would have loved this moment.

She would have been absolutely bouncing around the cabin with excitement.

Yo would have been stoic and steady, but he would have cracked a smile when he thought we weren't looking.

The tears ruin my vision.

Lacking gravity, they coat my eyes.

It's like trying to see underwater.

I wipe them off and fling them across the control room.

They splatter onto the opposite wall.

I don't have time for this.

I have an alien thingy to catch.

I unhook the belt on the chair and float over to the airlock.

My mind is awhirl with ideas and questions.

And I'm jumping to wild, unfounded conclusions left and right.

Maybe this intelligent alien species invented Astrophage.

Maybe they genetically engineered it specifically to "grow"

spaceship fuel.

The ultimate in solar power.

Maybe once I explain what's happening to Earth, they'll have a solution.

Or maybe they'll board my ship and lay eggs in my brain.

You can never be sure.

I open the inner airlock door and pull out the EVA suit.

So, do I have any idea how to get into this thing?

Or how to safely use it?

I disable the chrysalis-lock of the Orlan-MKS2 EVA suit and open the rear hatch.

I activate main power by flicking a switch on the belt.

The suit boots up almost immediately and the status panel attached to the chest component reads -what the heck?

I know everything that's going on in here.

We were probably trained on this thing extensively.

I know it the same way I know physics.

It's there in my mind, but I don't remember learning it.

The Russian-made suit is a single-pressure vessel.

Unlike American models where you put the top and bottom on, then a bunch of complex stuff for the helmet and gloves, the Orlan series is basically a onesie with a hatch in the back.

You step into it, close the hatch, and you're done.

It's like an insect molting in reverse.

I open the back and wriggle into the suit.

Zero g is a real boon here.

I don't have to fight with the suit nearly as much as I normally would.

Weird.

I know this is easier than other times I've done it, but don't remember any other times I've done it.

I think I have brain damage from that coma.

I'm functional enough for now.

I press on.

I get my arms and legs into their respective holes.

The jumpsuit is uncomfortable in the Orlan.

I'm supposed to be wearing a special undergarment.

I even know what it looks like, but it's just for temperature regulation and bio-monitoring.

I don't have time to find it in the storage area.

I have a date with a cylinder.

Now in the suit, I push steadily against the airlock wall with my legs to push the open rear flap to the wall.

Once it gets to within a few inches (centimeters, I should say.

This is Russian- made after all), a light turns green on the chest-mounted status panel.

I reach up to the panel with my thickly gloved hand and press the Autoseal button.

The suit ratchets the opening closed with a series of loud clicks.

With a final "clunk"

the outer seal locks into place.

My status board reads green and I have seven hours of life support available.

Internal pressure is 400 hectopascals-about 40 percent of Earth's atmosphere at sea level.

That's normal for spacesuits.

The whole process took only five minutes.

I'm ready to go outside.

Interesting.

I didn't have to go through a decompression step.

On space stations back home, astronauts have to spend hours in an airlock slowly acclimating to the low pressure needed for the EVA suit before they can go out.

I don't have that problem.

Apparently, the entire Hail Mary is at that 40 percent pressure.

Good design.

The only reason space stations around Earth have a full atmosphere of pressure is in case the astronauts have to abort and return to Earth in a hurry.

But for the Hail Mary crew...where would we go?

May as well use the low pressure all the time.

Makes things easier on the hull and lets you do rapid EVAs.

I take a deep breath and let it out.

A soft whir comes from somewhere behind me and cool air flows along my back and shoulders.

Air conditioning.

It feels nice.

I grab a handhold and spin myself around.

I pull the inner airlock door closed and then rotate the primary lever to begin the cycling sequence.

A pump fires up.

It's louder than I would have thought.

It sounds like an idling motorcycle.

I keep my hand on the lever.

Pushing it back to the original position will cancel the cycle and repressurize.

If I see even a hint of a red light on my suit panel, I'm going to throw that lever so fast it'll make my head spin.

After a minute, the pump grows quieter.

Then quieter still.

It's probably as loud as it ever was.

But with the air leaving the chamber, there's no way for the noise to get to me other than through my feet touching the Velcro pads on the floor.

Finally, the pump stops.

I'm in total silence aside from the fans inside the suit.

The airlock controls show that the pressure inside is zero, and a yellow light turns green.

I'm clear to open the outer door.

I grab the hatch crank, then hesitate.

"What am I doing?"

I say.

Is this really a good idea?

I want that cylinder so badly I'm just plowing ahead without any sort of plan.

Is this worth risking my life over?

Yes.

Unequivocally.

Okay, but is it worth risking the lives of everyone on Earth over?

Because if I mess up and die out there, then the whole Hail Mary Project will have been in vain.

Hmm.

Yes.

It's still worth it.

I don't know what these aliens are like, what they want, or what they're planning to say.

But they will have information.

Any information, even stuff I'd rather not know, is better than none.

I spin the handle and open the door.

The empty blackness of space lies beyond.

The light of Tau Ceti glistens off the door.

I peek my head out and see Tau Ceti with my own eyes.

At this distance, it's a little less bright than the sun as seen from Earth.

I double-check my tether to make darn sure I'm attached, then I step out into space.

- I'm good at this.

I must have practiced a lot.

Maybe in a neutral-buoyancy tank or something.

But it comes as second nature to me.

I exit the airlock and clamp one of my tethers to a rail on the outside hull.

Always have two tethers.

And always have at least one attached.

That way you're never at risk of floating away from the ship.

The Orlan-MKS2 is possibly the best EVA suit ever made, but it doesn't have a SAFER unit like NASA's EMU suit.

At least with a SAFER unit you have minimal thrust capability to return to the ship if you fall adrift.

All that information floods into my mind at once.

I guess I've put a lot of time and thought into spacesuits.

Maybe I'm our crew's EVA specialist?

I don't know.

I flip up the sun visor and peer toward the Blip-A.

I wish I could glean some special insight by seeing it in person, but it's pretty far away.

The Hail Mary's telescope gave me a much better view.

Still, there's something...unique about staring directly at an alien spacecraft.

I catch a glint of the cylinder.

Every now and then the flat ends of the gently tumbling cylinder reflect Taulight.

I've decided "Taulight"

is a word, by the way.

Light from Tau Ceti.

It's not "sunlight."

Tau Ceti isn't the sun.

So...Taulight.

I still have a good twenty minutes before the cylinder reaches the ship.

I watch it for a while to guess where it'll hit.

It'd be nice to have a crewmate inside at the radar station.

It'd be nice to have a crewmate at all.

After five minutes, I have a good bead on the cylinder.

It's headed for roughly the center of the ship.

It's as good a place as any for aliens to aim for.

I make my way across the hull.

The Hail Mary is pretty big.

My little pressurized area is only half its length and the back half flares out to be three times as wide.

Most of that will be empty now, I guess.

It used to be full of Astrophage for my one- way trip here.

The hull is crisscrossed with rails and latch points for EVA tethering.

Tether by tether, rail by rail, I make my way toward the center of the ship.

I have to step over a thick ring.

It circles the crew compartment area of the ship.

It's a good 2 feet thick.

I don't know what it is, but it must be pretty heavy.

Mass is everything when it comes to spaceship design, so it must be important.

I'll speculate about that later.

I continue along, one hull latch point at a time, until I'm roughly in the center of the hull.

The cylinder creeps closer.

I adjust my position a tad to keep up with it.

After an excruciatingly long wait, it's almost within reach.

I wait.

No need to get greedy.

If I paw at it too early, I might knock it off course and into space.

I'd have no way of recovering it.

I don't want to look dumb in front of the aliens.

Because they're surely watching me right now.

Probably counting my limbs, noting my size, figuring out what part they should eat first, whatever.

I let the cylinder get closer and closer.

It's moving less than 1 mile per hour.

Not exactly a bullet pass.

Now that it's so close, I can estimate its size.

It's not big at all.

About the size and shape of a coffee can.

It's a dull gray color with splotches of slightly darker gray randomly here and there.

Similar to the Blip-A's hull, kind of.

Different color but same blotchiness.

Maybe it's a stylistic thing.

Random splotches are "in"

this season or something.

The cylinder floats into my arms and I grab it with both hands.

It has less mass than I expected.

It's probably hollow.

It's a container.

There's something inside they want me to see.

I hold the cylinder under one arm and use the other to deal with tethers.

I hurry back to the airlock.

It's a stupid thing to do.

There's no reason to hurry and it literally endangers my life.

One slip-up and I'd be off in space.

But I just can't wait.

I get back into the ship, cycle the airlock, and float into the control room with my prize in hand.

I open the Orlan suit, already thinking about what tests I'll run on the cylinder.

I have a whole lab to work with!

The smell hits me immediately.

I gasp and cough.

The cylinder is bad!

No, not bad.

But it smells bad.

I can barely breathe.

The chemical smell is familiar.

What is it?

Cat pee?

Ammonia.

It's ammonia.

"Okay,"

I wheeze.

"Okay.

Think."

My gut instinct is to close the suit again.

But that would just trap me in a small volume with the ammonia that's already in here.

Better to let the cylinder air out in the larger volume of the ship.

Ammonia isn't toxic-at least, not in small quantities.

And the fact that I can still breathe at all tells me it's a small quantity.

If it weren't, my lungs would have caustic burns and I'd be unconscious or dead now.

As it is, there's just a bad smell.

I can handle a bad smell.

I climb out the back of the suit while the cylinder floats in the middle of the console room.

Now that it's not a shock anymore, I can handle the ammonia.

It's no worse than using a bunch of Windex in a small room.

Unpleasant but not dangerous.

I grab the cylinder-and it's hot as heck!

I yelp and pull my hands away.

I blow on them for a moment and check for burns.

It wasn't too bad.

Not stovetop hot.

But hot.

Grabbing it with my bare hands was stupid.

Flawed logic.

I assumed that since I'd been holding it earlier it was okay to do now.

But earlier I had very thick spacesuit gloves protecting my hands.

"You've been a bad alien cylinder,"

I say to it.

"You need a time-out."

I pull my arm into my sleeve and wrap my hand in the cuff.

I use my now-protected knuckles to nudge the cylinder into the airlock.

Once it's in, I close the door.

I'll let it be for now.

It'll cool down to ambient air temperature eventually.

And while it does, I don't want it floating randomly around my ship.

I don't think there's anything in the airlock that can get hurt by some heat.

How hot was it?

Well, I had both hands on it (like an idiot) for a fraction of a second.

My own reaction time was enough to keep me from getting burned.

So it's probably less than 100 degrees Celsius.

I open and close my hands a few times.

They don't hurt anymore, but the memory of the pain lingers.

"Where'd the heat come from?"

I mumbled.

The cylinder was out in space for a good forty minutes.

Over that time it should have radiated heat via blackbody radiation.

It should be cold, not hot.

I'm about 1 AU from Tau Ceti, and Tau Ceti has half the luminosity of the sun.

So I don't think the Taulight could have heated the cylinder up much.

Definitely not more than blackbody radiation would cool it down.

So either it has a heater inside or it was extremely hot when it started its trip.

I guess I'll find out soon enough.

It's not very heavy, so it's probably thin.

If there's no internal heat source, it'll cool off very fast in the air here.

The room still smells like ammonia.

Yuck.

I float down to the lab.

I don't know where to begin.

So many things I want to do.

Maybe I should start by just identifying the material the cylinder is made of?

Something harmless to the Blip-A's crew might be incredibly toxic to me and neither of us would know it.

Maybe I should check for radiation.

I drift down to the lab table and put out a hand to steady myself.

I'm getting better at the zero-g thing.

I think I remember seeing an astronaut documentary saying some people handle it fine, while others really struggle.

Looks like I'm one of the lucky ones.

I'm using "lucky"

loosely here.

I'm on a suicide mission.

So...

yeah.

The lab is a mystery.

It has been for a while.

It's clearly set up with the idea that there'll be gravity.

It has tables, chairs, test- tube trays, et cetera.

There's none of the usual stuff you would expect to see in a weightless environment.

No Velcro on the walls, no computer screens at all angles.

No efficient use of space.

Everything assumes there will be a "floor."

The ship can accelerate just fine.

For a good long time too.

It had me at 1.5 g's for probably a few years.

But they can't expect me to just leave the engines on and fly in circles to keep gravity in the lab, right?

I look around at each piece of lab equipment and try to relax my mind.

There has to be a reason for this.

And it's in my memory somewhere.

The trick is to think about what I want to know, but not stress about it too much.

It's like falling asleep.

You can't really do it if you concentrate on it too hard.

So many top-of-the-line pieces of equipment.

I let my mind wander as I scan across them all....

B y the time we reached Geneva, I'd completely lost track of what day it was.

The computer models for the Astrophage breeder weren't lining up with the real-world performance.

Though I had managed to breed up almost six grams of Astrophage so far.

When all was said and done, the aircraft carrier's reactor just couldn't generate enough heat to speed up the reaction any further.

Stratt kept vaguely saying they were going to provide a heat source capable of keeping up, but nothing had come of it yet.

I typed away on my computer even as the luxury private jet came to a halt at the gate.

Stratt had to nudge me to make me stop working at all.

Three hours later, we waited in a conference room.

Always a conference room.

My life was a collection of conference rooms these days.

This one was nicer than most, at least.

With fancy wood paneling and a stylish mahogany table.

It was really something.

Stratt and I didn't talk.

I worked on heat-transfer-rate coefficients while she typed away on her laptop doing gosh- knows-what.

We spent enough time together as it was.

Finally, a dour-looking woman entered the room and sat across from Stratt.

"Thank you for seeing me, Ms.

Stratt,"

she said with a Norwegian accent.

"No need to thank me, Dr.

Lokken,"

she said.

"I'm here against my will."

I looked up from my laptop.

"You are?

I thought you scheduled this."

She didn't take her eyes off the Norwegian.

"I scheduled it because I had six different world leaders on the phone at the same time nagging me to do it.

I finally relented."

"And you are...?"

Lokken asked me.

"Ryland Grace."

Analysis of Water-Based Assumptions and Recalibration of Expectations for Evolutionary Models'?"

"Yeah, got a problem with that?"

I said.

Stratt half smiled at me.

"You're famous."

"Infamous,"

said Lokken.

"His childish paper was a slap in the face to the entire scientific community.

This man works for you?

Absurd.

All his assumptions about alien life were proven wrong."

I scowled.

"Hey.

My claim is life doesn't need water to evolve.

Just because we found some life that does use water, that doesn't mean I'm wrong."

"Of course it does.

Two life-forms independently evolved to require water-"

"Independently?!"

I snorted.

"Are you out of your mind?

Do you honestly think something as complicated as mitochondria would evolve the same way twice?

This is obviously a panspermia event."

She waved off my statement as if it were an annoying insect.

"Astrophage mitochondria is very different from Earth mitochondria.

They clearly evolved separately."

"They're ninety-eight percent identical!"

"Ahem,"

said Stratt.

"I don't really get what you're fighting about, but can we-"

I pointed at Lokken.

"This idiot thinks Astrophage evolved independently, but it's obvious Astrophage and Earth life are related!"

"That's fascinating, but-"

Lokken slapped the table.

"How could a common ancestor have gotten across interstellar space?"

"The same way Astrophage does it!"

She leaned toward me.

"Then why haven't we seen interstellar life all along?"

I leaned toward her.

"No idea.

Maybe it was a fluke."

"How do you explain the differences in mitochondria?"

"Four billion years of divergent evolution."

"Stop,"

Stratt said calmly.

"I don't know what this is...some sort of science-related pissing contest?

That's not what we're here for.

Dr.

Grace, Dr.

Lokken, please sit down."

I plopped into my seat and folded my arms.

Lokken sat as well.

Stratt fiddled with a pen.

"Dr.

Lokken, you've been hassling governments to hassle me.

Over and over.

Day in and day out.

I know you want to be involved in Project Hail Mary, but I won't make it a huge international mess.

We don't have time for the politicking and kingdom-building that always happens on big projects."

"I'm not happy to be here either,"

Lokken said.

"I'm here, at great inconvenience to me as well as you, because this was the only way to tell you a critical design flaw in the Hail Mary."

Stratt sighed.

"We sent out those preliminary designs for general feedback.

Not command appearances in Geneva."

"Then file this under 'general feedback.' "

"Could have been an email."

"You would have deleted it.

You have to listen to me, Stratt.

This is important."

Stratt twirled the pen around a few more times.

"Well, I'm here.

Go ahead."

Lokken cleared her throat.

"Correct me if I'm wrong, but the entire purpose of the Hail Mary is to be a laboratory.

One we can send to Tau Ceti to see why that star-and that star alone- is immune to Astrophage."

"That's right."

She nodded.

"Then would you also agree that the lab aboard the ship itself is the most important component?"

"Yes,"

Stratt said.

"Without it, the mission is meaningless."

"Then we have a serious problem."

Lokken pulled several sheets of paper from her purse.

"I have a list of the lab equipment you want aboard.

Spectrometers, DNA sequencers, microscopes, chemistry lab glassware-"

"I'm aware of the list,"

Stratt said.

"I was the one who signed off on it."

Lokken dropped the papers on the table.

"Most of this stuff won't work in zero g."

Stratt rolled her eyes.

"We've thought of that, of course.

Companies all over the world are working on zero-g-rated versions of this equipment as we speak."

Lokken shook her head.

"Do you have any idea how much research and development went into making electron microscopes?

Gas chromatographs?

Everything else on this list?

A century of scientific advances brought about by failure after failure.

You want to just assume that making these things zero-g functional is going to work on the first try?"

"I don't see any way around it, unless you invented artificial gravity."

"We have invented artificial gravity,"

Lokken insisted.

"A long time ago."

Stratt shot me a look.

Obviously that had caught her off guard.

"I think she means a centrifuge,"

I said.

"I know she means a centrifuge,"

Stratt said.

"What do you think?"

"I hadn't thought of it before.

I guess...it could work...."

Stratt shook her head.

"No.

That won't fly.

We have to keep things simple.

As simple as possible.

Big, solid ship, minimal moving parts.

The more complications we have the more points of failure we risk."

"It's worth the risk,"

said Lokken.

"We'd have to add a huge counterweight to the Hail Mary to even make that work."

Stratt pursed her lips.

"I'm sorry, but we barely have enough energy to make the Astrophage for the current mass limit.

We can't just double it."

"Wait.

We have enough energy to make all the fuel?

When did that happen-?"

I said.

"You don't need to add mass,"

Lokken said.

She pulled another paper from her purse and slapped it down on the table.

"If you take the current design, cut it in half between the crew compartment and the fuel tanks, the two sides will have a good mass ratio for a centrifuge."

Stratt peered at the diagram.

"You put all the fuel on the same side.

That's two million kilograms."

"No."

I shook my head.

"The fuel would be gone."

They both looked at me.

"It's a suicide mission,"

I said.

"The fuel will be gone when they get to Tau Ceti.

Lokken picked a split point where the back of the ship will weigh three times as much as the front.

It's a good mass ratio for a centrifuge.

It could work."

"Thank you,"

said Lokken.

"How do you cut a ship in half?"

asked Stratt.

"How does it become a centrifuge?"

Lokken flipped the diagram over to reveal a detailed image showing a faring between the two ship halves.

"Spools of Zylon cabling between the crew compartment and the rest of the ship.

We could simulate one g of gravity with a hundred meters of separation."

Stratt pinched her chin.

Had someone actually changed her mind on something?

"I don't like complexity..."

she said.

"I don't like risk."

"This removes complexity and risk,"

Lokken said.

"The ship, the crew, the Astrophage...it's all just a support system for the lab equipment.

You need reliable equipment.

Stuff that's been in use for years with millions of man-hours of commercial use.

Every imaginable kink has been worked out of those systems.

If you have one g of gravity-to make sure they'll be in the environment they were perfected for-you get the benefit of all that reliability."

"Hmm,"

said Stratt.

"Grace?

Your thoughts?"

"I...I think it's a good idea."

"Really?"

"Yeah,"

I said.

"I mean, we already have to design the ship to withstand four years of constant acceleration at one and a half g's or so.

It's going to be pretty solid."

She took a longer look at Lokken's diagram.

"Wouldn't this make the artificial gravity in the crew area upside down?"

And she was right.

The Hail Mary was designed so that "down"

was "toward the engines."

As the ship accelerates, the crew is pushed "down"

to the floor.

But inside a centrifuge, "down"

is always "away from the center of rotation."

So the crew would all be pushed toward the nose of the ship.

"Yes, that would be a problem."

Lokken pointed to the diagram.

The cables didn't attach directly to the crew compartment.

They attached to two large discs on either side.

"The cabling attaches to these big hinges.

The whole front half of the ship can rotate 180 degrees.

So when they're in centrifuge mode, the nose will face inward toward the other half of the ship.

Inside the crew compartment, the force of gravity will be away from the nose-same as when the engines are thrusting."

Stratt took it in.

"This is a fairly complicated piece of machinery and you'll be breaking the ship into two parts.

You honestly think this is less of a risk?"

"Less risk than using brand-new, insufficiently tested equipment.

Trust me, I've used sensitive equipment most of my career,"

I said.

"It's finicky and delicate even in ideal conditions."

Stratt picked up her pen and tapped it on the table several times.

"Okay.

We'll do it."

Lokken smiled.

"Excellent.

I'll write up a paper and send it along to the UN.

We can form a committee-"

"No, I said we'll do it."

Stratt stood up.

"You're with us now, Dr.

Lokken.

Pack a bag and meet us at Genve Aroport.

Terminal 3, private plane called Stratt."

"What?

I work for ESA.

I can't just-"

"Yeah, don't bother,"

I said.

"She's going to call your boss or your boss's boss or whatever and have you assigned to her.

You just got drafted."

"I...I wasn't volunteering to design it personally,"

Lokken protested.

"I only meant to point out-"

"I never said you volunteered,"

Stratt said.

"It's not voluntary at all."

"You can't just force me to work for you."

But Stratt was already walking out of the room.

"Meet us at the airport in one hour or I'll have the Swiss Gendarmerie drag you there in two hours.

Your call."

Lokken stared at the door, flabbergasted, then back to me.

"You get used to it,"

I said.

- The ship is a centrifuge!

I remember it all now!

That's why there's a mysterious area called "Cable Faring."

That's where the spools and Zylon cables are.

The ship can break in half, turn the crew compartment around, and spin.

That turning-around part-that's the weird ring I saw on the hull during my EVA!

I remember the design now.

It has two big hinges on it, allowing the crew compartment to turn around before the centrifuge is activated.

It's strangely reminiscent of Apollo spacecraft.

The lunar lander was attached below the command module at launch, but they'd separate, turn the command module around, and reconnect with the lander during their trip to the moon.

It's one of those things that looks ridiculous but ends up being the most effective way to solve a problem.

I float back up to the cockpit and flip through screens on various consoles.

As each one fails to be what I want, I move to the next.

Finally, I find it.

The "Centrifuge"

screen.

It was hiding out as a subpanel in the Life Support screen.

It looks simple enough.

There are yaw, pitch, and roll readouts, showing the current state of the ship, just like the Navigation panel has.

A separate readout is labeled "Crew Compartment Angle"-that must be the turning-around bit.

Each one reads "0 per second."

Below those is a button labeled "Engage Centrifuge Sequence."

Underneath that are a bunch of numbers related to rotational acceleration rate, final speed, spooling rate, estimated g-force at the floor of the lab, four different screens for spool status (I guess there are four spools, two on each side), which emergency protocols to follow if there's a problem, and a lot more stuff I won't pretend to understand.

The important thing is all those readouts have values already in them.

Got to love computers.

They do all the thinking for you so you don't have to.

I do take a closer look at the emergency protocol mode.

It just reads "Spin Down."

I tap the readout and a dropdown appears.

Looks like my options are: "Spin Down,"

"Halt All Spools,"

and one in red labeled "Separate."

I'm pretty sure I don't want to do that.

I suspect "Spin Down"

will slowly decelerate the ship's spin if there's a problem.

Sounds good, so I'll leave it set to that.

I'm about to engage the centrifuge, but then I pause.

Is everything tied down?

Is it safe to suddenly have a bunch of force acting on the ship?

I shake it off.

The ship was accelerating constantly for several years.

It has to be comfortable with a little centrifuge action, right?

Right?

As hundreds of astronauts have done before, I place my faith and my life in the hands of the engineers who designed the system.

Dr.

Lokken, I guess.

Hope she did her job.

I push the button.

First, nothing happens.

I wonder if I even pressed it right, or if I just fumbled at the screen like I have so many times on my phone in the past.

But then the alert chimes throughout the ship.

The piercing triple beep repeats every few seconds.

There is no way for any crewmember to miss a signal like that.

A final warning, I guess, in case the crew had a failure to communicate.

Over my head, the Petrovascope screen changes to lock-out mode.

That confirms my earlier suspicion that the ship's maneuvering engines are Astrophage-based.

I mean, it's kind of obvious when you think about it.

But I wasn't sure until now.

The beeping stops and nothing really happens.

Then I notice that I'm closer to the Nav panel than I was before.

I drifted to the edge of the room.

I put my arm out to steady myself and get back to normal.

And then I drift toward the Nav panel again.

"Ohhh,"

I say.

It's begun.

I'm not drifting toward the Nav panel.

The whole cockpit is drifting toward me.

The ship is starting to spin.

Everything veers off and changes direction.

That'll be because as the ship spins, the crew compartment is also turning around.

This could get complicated.

"Uh...right!"

I kick off the wall and into the pilot seat.

I tilt.

Or, rather, the room tilts.

No, that doesn't make sense.

Nothing tilts.

The ship is spinning around faster and faster.

It's also accelerating the acceleration.

Also, the front half of the ship has detached from the rear, and it's rotating around those two big hinges.

When it's done, the nose will be pointed in toward the rear half of the ship.

All of this is going on at the same time, so the forces I'm feeling are really weird.

Extremely complicated stuff, but also not my problem.

It's up to the computer to deal with.

I watch the Centrifuge panel.

The pitch rate reads 0.17 per second.

Another readout labeled "Component Separation"

reads 2.4 meters.

There's a little beep and the "Crew Compartment Angle"

readout blinks.

It shows as 180.

I assume this whole sequence was worked out well in advance to minimize shock to the system and/or crew.

I feel a slight pressure on my butt as the seat pushes up against me.

The transition is very smooth.

I just...experience more and more gravity in what feels like a tilting room.

It's a weird sensation.

I know, logically, that I'm in a ship spinning around.

But there are no windows to see out of.

Only screens.

I check the telescope screen that's still pointed at the Blip-A.

The stars in the background do not move.

It's accounting for my rotation somehow and canceling it.

That bit of software was probably tricky, considering the camera probably isn't at the exact center of rotation.

My arms grow heavy, so I put them on the armrests.

I have to start using my neck muscles again for the first time in a while.

Five minutes after the sequence began, I experience a little less than normal Earth gravity.

A quadruple beep announces the end of the sequence.

I check the Centrifuge screen.

It shows a pitch rate of 20.71 per second, a total separation of 104 meters, and a "Lab Gravity"

of 1.00 g.

The diagram of the ship shows the Hail Mary split in two pieces, the nose of the crew compartment pointed inward toward the other half.

The two halves are comically far apart, and the entire system spins slowly.

Well, actually pretty fast, but it looks slow at that scale.

I unstrap from the chair, walk to the airlock, and open the hatch.

The smell of ammonia drifts into the cockpit again, but not nearly as bad as before.

The alien artifact lies on the floor.

I give it a quick touch with my finger to gauge temperature.

It's still pretty warm, but no longer scalding hot.

Good.

There's no internal heater or weird stuff like that.

It just started out really hot.

I pick it up.

Time to see what this thing is made of.

And what's inside.

Before leaving the cockpit, I take one last look at the Telescope screen.

I don't know why-I guess I just like to keep track of what extraterrestrial ships in my vicinity are up to.

The Blip-A spins in space.

It rotates end-over-end, probably at the exact same rate as the Hail Mary.

I guess they saw me spin up the centrifuge and figured it was another communication thing.

Humanity's first miscommunication with an intelligent alien race.

Glad I could be a part of it.

- I set the cylinder on the lab table.

Where do I begin?

Everywhere!

I check to see if it's radioactive with a Geiger counter.

It's not.

That's nice.

I poke it with various things to get a feel for its hardness.

It's hard.

It looks like metal but doesn't feel quite like metal.

I use a multimeter to see if it's conductive.

It isn't.

Interesting.

I get a hammer and chisel.

I want a small chip of the cylinder material for the gas chromatograph-that way I'll know what elements it's made of.

After a few smacks with the hammer, the chisel chips.

The cylinder isn't even dented.

"Hm."

The cylinder is too big to put in the gas chromatograph.

But I find a handheld x-ray spectrometer.

It looks like a UPC scanner gun.

Easy enough to use, and it'll give me some idea of what this thing is made of.

It's not as accurate as the chromatograph, but better than nothing.

After a quick scan, it tells me the cylinder is made of xenon.

"What...?"

I use the spectrometer on the steel lab table to make sure it's working correctly.

It reports iron, nickel, chromium, and so on.

Just what it should say.

So I check the cylinder again and get the same wacky results as with my first test.

I test it four more times but keep getting the same answer.

Why did I run the test so many times?

Because those results make no sense at all.

Xenon is a noble gas.

It doesn't react with anything.

It doesn't form bonds with anything.

And it's a gas at room temperature.

But somehow it's part of this solid material?

And no, it's not a cylinder filled with xenon or anything like that.

A spectrometer is not a deep, penetrating scan.

It can only tell you what's on the surface.

If I pointed it at gold-plated nickel, it would say "100% gold,"

because that's all it can see.

It can only tell me what the molecules on the surface of the cylinder are made of.

Apparently, they're made of xenon.

This handheld spectrometer can't detect elements lower than aluminum.

So there could be carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, whatever is lurking in there too.

But as for elements within the detector's range...I'm looking at pure xenon.

"How?!"

I plop down onto a stool and stare at the cylinder.

What a strange artifact.

What do I even call noble gases that react with things?

Ignobles?

But being flummoxed has one good side effect.

It makes me stop my frenzied attack on the cylinder and just look at it.

For the first time, I see that there is a thin line running around the circumference about an inch from the top.

I feel it with my fingernail.

It's definitely an indentation of some kind.

Is that a lid?

Maybe it just opens.

I pick up the cylinder and try to pull off the top.

It doesn't budge.

On a whim, I try to unscrew it.

It also doesn't budge.

But there's no reason aliens would follow the righty-tighty- lefty-loosey rule, is there?

I turn the lid to the right and it rotates.

My heart skips a beat!

I keep turning.

After 90 degrees I feel it release.

I pull the two chunks apart.

Both halves have complicated stuff going on inside.

They look like...models of some kind?

They both feature whisker- thin poles sticking up from their bases, leading to spheres of various sizes.

I don't see any moving parts, and everything appears to be made out of the same weird material as the case.

I check out the bottom half first.

Have to start somewhere.

A single whisker holds up...an abstract sculpture?

It's a marble-sized sphere and a BB-sized sphere each held in place by thinner whiskers branching off the main vertical "trunk."

There's also an oddly parabolic shape connecting the tops of the two spheres.

This whole thing looks familiar to me...why...?

"Petrova line!"

I blurt out.

I've seen that arc shape enough times to know it by heart.

My heart races.

I point to the large sphere.

"So you must be a star.

And the little guy must be a planet."

These aliens are aware of Astrophage.

Or, at least, they're aware of the Petrova line.

But that doesn't really tell me anything.

They're in an Astrophage-powered ship, so of course they know about Astrophage.

And we're chatting in a solar system that has a Petrova line, so that's not surprising either.

This might be their home system for all I know.

This is a good start, though.

We were "talking"

by flashing our engines.

So they know I use Astrophage and that I can "see"

(with help from the ship) the Petrova frequency.

From that, they concluded I must be able to see the Petrova line.

They're smart.

I look at the other half of the doohickey.

Dozens of whiskers rise from the base.

They're all different lengths and each one ends in a sphere less than a millimeter across.

I poke a whisker with my finger and it doesn't bend.

I press harder and harder.

Eventually the whole doohickey slides on the table.

Those whiskers are stronger than anything that thin should be.

I guess xenon makes pretty strong material when you get it to react with things.

It infuriates my tender scientist's heart!

I try to put it out of my head and get back to the task at hand.

I count thirty-one whiskers, each with its little sphere at the end.

While counting, I spot something special.

There's one whisker sticking up from the exact center of the disc, but unlike the others, it's not connected to a sphere.

I squint to get a good look.

Instead of a single sphere, it's two spheres of different sizes and an arc-okay, I see.

It's a very small replica of the Petrova- line model on the other half of the doohickey.

Maybe one- twentieth the scale.

And that little Petrova-line model has an even thinner whisker connecting it to another sphere at the tip of a different whisker.

No, not quite a sphere.

It's another Petrova-line model.

I scour the rest of the doohickey for any more of them, but I don't see any.

Just the one in the middle and the one off to the side.

"Wait a minute...waaaaait a minute..."

I pull out the drawer that has the lab computer panel in it.

Time to make use of that virtually infinite reference material.

I find a huge spreadsheet with the information I need, bring it into Excel (Stratt loves well-tested, off-the-shelf products), and do a bunch of operations on it.

Soon, I have the data plot I wanted.

And it matches.

Stars.

The little spheres on the end of the whiskers are stars.

Of course they are.

What else would have a Petrova line?

But they're not just any old stars.

These are specific stars.

They're all in the correct relative positions to one another, with Tau Ceti right in the center.

The map's point of view is kind of odd.

To make the spheres match my data plot of star locations, I have to hold the doohickey at a 30-degree angle and kind of rotate it around a bit.

But of course, all of Earth's data is based on Earth's orbital plane being the reference point.

People from a different planet would have a different coordinate system.

But no matter how you look at it, the end result is the same: The doohickey is a map of the local stars.

Then I'm suddenly very interested in that little filament connecting the center sphere (Tau Ceti) to another sphere.

I check the corresponding star in my catalog: It's called 40 Eridani.

But I bet the crew of the Blip-A call it home.

That's the message.

"We're from the 40 Eridani system.

And now we're here at Tau Ceti."

But there's even more to it than that.

They're also saying "40 Eridani has a Petrova line, just like Tau Ceti."

I stop to let that sink in.

"Are you in the same boat?!"

I say.

Of course they are!

Astrophage is getting at all the local stars.

These people are from a planet orbiting 40 Eridani, and 40 Eridani is infected just like Earth's sun!

They have some pretty good science going on, so they did the same thing we did.

Make a ship, and go to Tau Ceti to see why it's not dying!

"Holy cow!"

I say.

Yes, I'm jumping to a conclusion there.

Maybe they harvest Astrophage from their Petrova line and consider it a boon.

Maybe they invented Astrophage.

Maybe they just think Petrova lines are pretty.

There are a bunch of different things this could mean.

But the most likely, in my admittedly biased opinion, is that they're here to find a solution.

Aliens.

Actual aliens.

Aliens from the 40 Eridani system.

So I guess that makes them Eridanians?

Hard to say, even harder to remember.

Eridans?

No.

How about Eridians?

Sounds kind of like "iridium,"

which is one of the cooler-sounding elements on the periodic table.

Yeah, I'm going to call them Eridians.

And I think it's pretty obvious how I should respond.

I thoroughly searched the lab a few days ago.

There's an electronics kit in one of the drawers.

The trick is remembering which one.

I don't remember, of course.

It takes me a while of searching and not-quite swearing while I do, but I eventually find it.

I don't have any xenonite (that's what I'm calling this weird alien compound, and no one can stop me).

But I do have solder and a soldering iron.

I break off a little piece of solder, melt one end, and stick it to the Tau Ceti sphere.

It sticks pretty well, which is a relief.

You never know with xenonite.

I check, double-check, and triple-check to make sure I correctly identify which one of the little stars in the model is Sol (Earth's sun).

I solder the other side of the wire to Sol.

I search the lab until I find some hard paraffin.

With some poking, open flames, and mild swearing, I'm able to make a really poor approximation of the Petrova-line icon they sent me.

I smush it onto Sol in the model.

It looks all right.

At least, good enough that they should get the idea.

I take a look.

The sleek, thin lines of the xenonite whiskers are ruined by my crooked, blob-ended solder addition and crappy wax model.

It's like someone added a crayon drawing into the corner of a Da Vinci, but it will have to do.

I try to screw the top and bottom of the doohickey back together.

They refuse to mate.

I try again.

It still doesn't work.

I remember that Eridians use left-handed threading in their screws.

So I do what, to me, is an unscrewing motion.

The two pieces connect perfectly.

Time to throw it back to them.

Politely.

Except I can't.

Not with the ship spinning around like this.

If I tried to step out of the airlock, I'd go flying off into space.

I grab the doohickey and climb up to the control room.

I strap myself into the chair and order the ship to spin down.

Like last time, I feel the room tilt, though this time it tilts the other way.

And again, I know it's not actually tilting, it's my perception of the lateral acceleration being applied, but whatever.

I feel the gravity decrease and the tilt of the room reduce until I'm back in zero g again.

This time there's no disorientation.

I guess my lizard brain has made its peace with the fact that gravity comes and goes.

The operation ends with a final "clunk"

as the reoriented crew compartment seats into the rear half of the ship.

I get back in the EVA suit, grab the doohickey, and head out into space once again.

I don't need to work my way across the hull with tethers this time.

I just clip my tether in the airlock.

The Blip-A has stopped spinning-probably did it when the Hail Mary stopped.

And it's still 217 meters away.

I don't have to be Joe Montana to make this pass.

I just need to set the doohickey in motion toward the Blip-A.

It's over a hundred meters across.

I should be able to hit it.

I give the doohickey a shove.

It floats away from me at a reasonable speed.

Maybe 2 meters per second-roughly a jogging pace.

This is communication of a sort too.

I'm telling my new friends that I can handle slightly faster deliveries.

The doohickey floats off toward the Eridian ship and I head back into mine.

"Okay, guys,"

I say.

"The enemy of my enemy is my friend.

If Astrophage is your enemy, I'm your friend."

- I watch the Telescope screen.

Occasionally I look away.

Sometimes I play Klondike solitaire on the Nav panel.

But I never go more than a few seconds without checking the telescope.

A thick pair of gloves, harvested from the lab earlier, tries to float away.

I grab them and wedge them behind the pilot's seat.

It's been two hours and my alien friends haven't had anything to say.

Are they waiting for me to say something else?

I just told them what star I was from.

It's their turn to say something, right?

Do they even have a concept of taking turns?

Or is that a purely human thing?

What if Eridians have a life-span of 2 million years and waiting a century to reply is considered polite?

How am I going to get rid of this red 7 on the rightmost pile?

I don't have any black 8s in my deck and- Movement!

I spin to the Telescope screen so fast my legs float out into the middle of the control room.

There's another cylinder coming my way.

I guess the many-armed hull-robot thing threw it just a moment ago.

I check the Radar screen.

Blip-B is plugging along at over a meter per second.

I only have a few minutes to suit up!

I get back into the EVA suit and cycle the airlock.

Once I open the outer door, I spot the cylinder tumbling end-over-end.

Might be the same one as before, might be new.

And this time, it's headed straight for the airlock.

I guess they saw that's where I exited and reentered the ship and decided to make things easier for me.

Very considerate of them.

They're accurate too.

A minute later, the cylinder floats right through the center of the open hatchway.

I catch it.

I wave to the Blip-A and close the hatch.

They probably don't know what a wave is, but I felt compelled to do it.

I return to the control room and wriggle out of the EVA suit, leaving the cylinder to float near the airlock.

The ammonia smell is powerful, but this time I'm ready for it.

I put the thick lab gloves on and grab the cylinder.

Even through the fireproof gloves, I can feel the warmth.

I know I should wait for it to cool down but I don't want to.

It looks the same as before.

I unscrew it the same left-handed way.

This time, there's no star map.

Instead, it's a model.

What am I looking at here?

A single post from the base holds up an irregular shape.

No, two irregular shapes connected by a tube.

Hey, wait.

One of the shapes is the Hail Mary.

Oh, and the other one is the Blip-A.

The models have no detail or texture.

But they're good enough for me to recognize what they represent, so they did their job.

The Hail Mary is only 3 inches long, while the Blip-A is closer to 8 inches.

Man, that ship is huge.

And that tube connecting them?

It connects to the Hail Mary's airlock and leads to the center of the Blip-A's diamond- shaped segment.

The tunnel is just wide enough to cover my airlock door.

They want to meet.

I let the model float in the middle of the room.

The xenonite is nearly indestructible, so I don't need to worry about it bumping into anything.

Is this a good idea?

I have a planet to save.

As awesome as it is to meet up with intelligent aliens, is this risk worth it?

The Eridians clearly understand Astrophage.

At least well enough to make engines out of it.

And-I think-they're trying to tell me they're here for the same reason I am.

They might have information I don't know.

They might even have the solution I'm looking for.

And they seem friendly enough.

But this is the interstellar equivalent of a stranger offering me candy.

I want the candy (information), but I don't know the stranger.

What's my alternative?

Ignore them?

I could carry on with my mission as if I never saw them at all.

They're probably as spooked to see me as I am to see them.

They might continue trying to talk, but they wouldn't get hostile, I don't think.

Or would they?

I have no way of knowing.

No, this is a no-brainer.

I've got to at least have a conversation with them.

If they have any information about Astrophage at all, no matter how minor, I have to talk to them.

It's a risk, yes, but this whole mission is a risk.

Okay.

So what would I do if I were them?

I'm an Eridian.

I want to build a tunnel that connects to the weird human ship.

But I don't know what the human ship's material is made of.

How can I guarantee any kind of attachment or seal?

My xenonite knowledge is beyond dispute, but how do I connect it to "humanium"

or whatever that ship is made of?

I've sent the human xenonite models.

So he knows what I have.

But I still don't know what he has.

They'll need a sample of my hull.

And they'll need to know it's a sample of my hull.

"Right,"

I say to no one.

I don't know if this is a good idea or a terrible idea.

But I'm going to knock a chunk of my hull off.

I grab a set of EVA tools.

They live in the lab in Drawer 17E.

I found them a while ago.

They're on a tool belt that can clip onto the EVA suit and everything.

Stratt and the gang made sure we had all the equipment we would need for hull repairs if needed.

Normally it would be Ilyukhina's job to fix stuff, but she's gone.

Huh.

Random memory.

Ilyukhina was our engineer-our fix- it gal.

Okay.

Well, now it's me.

I get back in the EVA suit, and back outside.

Again.

Bouncing in and out is getting kind of annoying.

I hope this tunnel thing works.

I make my way along the hull, one tether adjustment at a time.

And I get to thinking...

What good is a tunnel, exactly?

I doubt we have compatible environments.

We can't just connect the ships with a tunnel and shake hands.

I think there's a lot of ammonia over there.

And then there's the temperature.

Those cylinders are hot when I get them.

Some back-of-the-napkin math tells me that first cylinder they sent should have lost 100 degrees Celsius or more during that forty-minute trip (depending on what temperature it started at).

And it was still hot when I got it.

So it was really hot when it left their ship.

Like...way higher than the boiling point of water.

I try not to speculate too wildly, but come on.

I'm a scientist and these are aliens.

I'm going to speculate.

Do Eridians live in an environment hotter than the boiling point of water?

If so, it proves I was right!

The goldilocks zone is bull-puckey!

You don't need liquid water for life!

I should be more focused on the "first contact with intelligent aliens"

thing or the "save all of humanity"

thing, but gosh darn it, I can spend a moment to be happy about being right when everyone said I was wrong!

I finally reach a spot of hull that seems right for the job.

I'm aft of the entire pressurized portion of the ship, well past the part where it widens out.

If I'm right, I'm standing on a big empty tank that used to be full of Astrophage.

If I breach the hull here, it shouldn't matter.

I pull out a hammer and chisel.

Not the most elegant way to do this, but I can't think of anything better.

I start by putting one corner of the chisel on the hull and giving it a little tap.

There's a notable dent.

It doesn't take much to get through this outermost layer.

I use the hammer and chisel to separate a 6-inch circle of hull material.

There's a layer of something underneath.

I can feel it with the chisel.

Probably insulation.

I have to pry the circle out with the chisel.

The underlayer holds strong, but then gives way suddenly.

The hull sample flies off into space.

"Shoot!"

I leap off the ship.

I get a hand on the circle right before my tether snaps tight.

I breathe for a second, thinking about how dumb I am, then pull myself back along the tether to the ship.

Looking at the circle it seems like there's a light, foam substance attached to the underside.

Styrofoam, maybe.

Probably something more complicated than that.

"I hope you guys watched all that,"

I say.

"Because I'm not doing it again."

I throw the hull chunk at the Blip-A.

By doing this right in front of them, they'll know for sure I'm sending them a sample of the hull.

I hope it's enough for what they want to do.

I don't even know if they wanted it or needed it.

They might be looking at their screens right now and saying, "What is this idiot doing?

Is he poking a hole in his own ship?

Why?"

I stay on the hull and watch as the chunk tumbles in the Taulight.

The multi-armed robot on the Blip-A's hull slides along its rails for the reception.

Once positioned, it waits for the hull chunk to arrive and makes a perfect catch.

And then, I swear to God, it waves at me!

One of its little arms waves at me!

I wave back.

It waves again.

Okay, this could go on all day.

I head back toward the airlock.

Your move, guys.

- Their move is taking a long time and I'm getting bored.

Wow.

I'm sitting here in a spaceship in the Tau Ceti system waiting for the intelligent aliens I just met to continue our conversation...and I'm bored.

Human beings have a remarkable ability to accept the abnormal and make it normal.

I look through the controls of the Radar panel to see what other features it has.

After some digging through preference dialogs, I find what I'm looking for: the proximity-warning parameters.

Currently set to 100 kilometers.

Fairly reasonable.

You would expect things to be millions of kilometers away.

Tens of thousands at the very least.

So if some rock is within 100 kilometers of you, that's a major problem.

I change the setting to 0.26 kilometers.

I worry it'll reject the setting as too low, but it doesn't.

I stretch my back and float out of the pilot seat.

The Blip-A is 271 meters away.

If they get closer than 260 meters, or if they send another present that gets within that range, the proximity alert will go off.

I don't have to sit here and stare at the screen anymore.

The control room will blare a warning when the Blip- A does anything interesting.

I float down to the dormitory.

"Food,"

I say.

The arms pull a box out of their little stash in the ceiling and stick it to my bunk.

Someday I should look around in there and see what's available.

For now I kick off the ceiling and float down to the food.

The box, labeled 10- 1, has a Velcro-like strip on the bottom that helps it stay in place on the bedsheet.

I open it up and see a burrito.

Not sure what I expected, but okay.

Burrito it is.

Turns out it's a room-temperature burrito.

Beans, cheese, some red sauce...all pretty tasty, really.

But room temperature.

Either the crew doesn't get hot meals around here or the machine doesn't trust a recent coma patient not to burn himself on hot food.

Probably the latter.

I float up to the lab and put the burrito in the sample furnace.

I leave it in there for a few minutes before pulling it out with tongs.

The cheese bubbles and a cloud of steam slowly emanates out in all directions.

I leave the burrito to float in the air and cool.

I snicker.

If I really wanted a hot burrito, I'd turn on the spin drives, do an EVA, and hold the burrito in the light emitted from it.

That'd get it hot really quick.

As in: It would get vaporized along with my arm and whatever else was in the blast range, because- - "Welcome to Little Russia!"

said Dimitri.

He gave a theatrical wave at the aircraft carrier's lower hangar deck.

The whole space had been repurposed into a bunch of labs full of high-tech equipment.

Dozens of lab-coated scientists toiled away at their tasks, occasionally speaking Russian to one another.

Dimitri's Denizens, we called them.

We probably put more effort into naming stuff than we should have.

I clutched my little sample container like Scrooge with a bag of coins.

"I'm not happy with this."

"Oh, hush,"

said Stratt.

"I've only made eight grams of Astrophage so far, and I'm supposed to just give away two grams of it?

Two grams may not seem like much, but it's ninety-five billion Astrophage cells."

"It is for a good cause, my friend!"

said Dimitri.

"I promise you will like it.

Come, come!"

He led Stratt and me through to the main lab.

The center was dominated by a huge cylindrical vacuum chamber.

The chamber was open and three technicians mounted something to a table inside.

Dimitri said something in Russian to them.

They said something back.

He said some other thing and pointed to me.

They smiled and made happy Russian sounds.

Then Stratt said something stern in Russian.

"Sorry,"

said Dimitri.

"English only for now, my friends!

For the American!"

"Hello, American!"

said one of the technicians.

"I am speak of English for you!

You have fuel?"

I gripped my sample container tighter.

"I have some fuel...."

Stratt looked at me the way I look at stubborn students in my class.

"Hand it over, Dr.

Grace."

"You know, my breeder doubles Astrophage population over time, right?

Taking away two grams now is like taking away four grams next month."

She pulled the container out of my hands and handed it to Dimitri.

He held the small metal vial up and admired it.

"This is a good day.

I have looked forward to this day.

Dr.

Grace, please let me show you my spin drive!"

He gestured for me to follow and bounced up the stairs into the vacuum chamber.

The technicians exited one at a time to make room for us.

"All is attached,"

said one of them.

"Checklist is done.

Ready for test."

"Good, good,"

Dimitri said.

"Dr.

Grace, Ms.

Stratt.

Come, come!"

He led Stratt and me into the vacuum chamber.

A thick, shiny metal plate leaned against one wall.

The middle of the chamber had a round table with some kind of device resting on it.

"This is spin drive."

Dimitri beamed.

It wasn't much to look at.

It was a couple of feet across, mostly circular, but with one side of it cut flat.

Sensors and wires came out from apertures all over the place.

Dimitri lifted the top casing off to reveal the innards.

Things got more complicated.

Inside was a clear triangle on a rotor.

Dimitri gave it a little spin.

"See?

Spin.

Spin drive."

"How's it work?"

I asked.

He pointed to the triangle.

"This is the revolver-high- tensile-strength transparent polycarbonate.

And this"-he pointed to a nook between the revolver and the outer casing -"is where fuel comes in.

IR emitter inside that part of revolver emits small amount of light with 4.26 and 18.31 microns wavelength-that is wavelengths which attract Astrophage.

Astrophage go to that revolver face.

But not too hard.

Astrophage thrust is based on strength of IR light.

Dim light make weak thrust.

But enough to make Astrophage stick to surface."

He rotated the triangle and aligned an edge with the flat part of the casing.

"Rotate 120 degrees, this face of revolver with Astrophage stuck to it now points out the back of the ship.

Increase strength of IR light inside.

Astrophage now very excited, push very hard toward IR light!

Their thrust-Petrova- frequency light-leaves back of ship.

This pushes ship forward.

Millions of little Astrophages pushing on back of ship make it go, yes?"

I bent down for a look.

"I see...this way no part of the ship has to be in the blast area of the light."

"Yes, yes!"

said Dimitri.

"Astrophage force limited only by the brightness of IR light attracting it.

I did very much math and decided best is to make Astrophage exhaust all energy in four seconds.

Any faster and force will break revolver."

He rotated the revolver another 120 degrees and pointed to the remaining third of the casing.

"This is cleaning area.

Squeegee wipes dead Astrophage off revolver."

He pointed to the cleaning area, then the fueling area, and then the open face.

"All three areas active at same time.

So while this area cleans dead Astrophage off this face, fueling area adds Astrophage to that face, and other face is pointed out back of ship, providing thrust.

This pipelining means the part of triangle pointed out back of ship is always thrusting."

Dimitri opened my vial of Astrophage and set it in the fueling chamber.

I guess since the Astrophage will find their way to the triangle face, no special handling was required.

He could just...

let the fuel see the IR.

"Come, come,"

he said.

"Experiment time!"

We left the vacuum chamber and Dimitri sealed it off.

He yelled something in Russian, and all the Russians started repeating it.

Everyone made their way to the far side of the hangar deck, including us.

They'd set up a folding table.

It had a laptop on it with Cyrillic writing on the screen.

"Ms.

Stratt.

How far is carrier from closest land?"

Dimitri asked.

"About three hundred kilometers,"

she said.

"This is good."

"Wait, why?"

I said.

"Why is that good?"

Dimitri pursed his lips.

"It is...good.

Time for science!"

He pushed a button.

There was a muffled whump from the far side of the bay, followed by a hum, and then nothing.

"Experiment done."

He leaned forward to read the screen.

"Sixty thousand Newtons of force!"

He turned to the other Russians.

"60,000 !"

They all cheered.

Stratt turned to me.

"That's a lot, right?"

I was too busy staring slack-jawed at Dimitri to answer her.

"Did you say sixty thousand Newtons?"

He pumped his fist in the air.

"Yes!

Sixty thousand Newtons!

Maintained for one hundred microseconds!"

"Oh my God.

From that little thing?!"

I started to walk forward.

I had to see this for myself.

Dimitri grabbed my arm.

"No.

You stay here, friend.

We all stay here.

One point eight billion Joules of light energy was released.

This is why we needed vacuum chamber and one thousand kilograms of silicon.

No air to ionize.

Light goes directly to silicon block.

Energy is absorbed by melting the metal.

See?"

He turned the laptop toward me.

A camera feed from inside the vacuum chamber showed the glowing blob that was once a thick plate of metal.

"Whoa..."

I said.

"Yes, yes,"

Dimitri said.

"That Mr.

Einstein with his E = mc2.

Very powerful stuff.

We let the cooling system work on it for a few hours.

Uses seawater.

Will be fine."

I just shook my head in awe.

In just 100 microseconds- that's one ten-thousandth of a second-Dimitri's spin drive melted a metric ton of metal.

All that energy had been stored up in my little Astrophages.

Slowly harvested from the carrier's nuclear reactor heat over time by my breeder.

I mean, the math all checked out, but to see it actually demonstrated like that was another thing entirely.

"Wait...how much Astrophage did you use there?"

Dimitri smiled.

"I can only estimate based on thrust generated.

But was close to twenty micrograms."

"I gave you two entire grams!

Can I have the rest back, please?"

"Don't be greedy,"

Stratt said.

"Dimitri needs it for further experimentation."

She turned to him.

"Good work.

How big will the real drive be?"

Dimitri pointed to the video feed.

"That big.

That is real drive."

"No, I mean the one on the ship."

"That,"

he said, pointing again.

"You want redundancy, safety, reliability, yes?

So we don't make just one big engine.

We make thousand little ones.

One thousand and nine, actually.

Enough for all thrust needed and much to spare.

Some malfunction during trip?

Not a problem.

More thrust from the others to compensate."

"Ah."

Stratt nodded.

"Tons of little spin drives.

I like it.

Keep up the good work."

She headed to the stairwell.

I stared at Dimitri.

"If you'd set off all two grams of that sample at once..."

He shrugged.

"Fwoosh!

We are vapor.

All of us.

Carrier too.

Explosion would make small tsunami.

But three hundred kilometers away from land, so is okay."

He slapped me on the back.

"And I would owe you drink in afterlife, yes?!

Ha-ha-ha-ha!"

- "Huh,"

I say to myself.

"So that's how the spin drive works."

I munch on my burrito.

So I guess I have a thousand of those ("A thousand and nine!"

I hear Dimitri's voice in my head).

At least-that's how many I started with.

Some probably went kaput during the trip.

There's probably a panel on the Spin Drive console that'll tell me the status of each little one.

The proximity alert interrupts my thoughts.

"Finally!"

I "drop"

the burrito (it floats where I leave it) and launch myself up to the control room.

The hatch from the dormitory to the lab doesn't line up with the hatch from the lab to the control room, but there's a diagonal line of travel that will send me through both if I do it just right.

I don't get it right this time.

I have to push off a lab wall en route.

Still, I'm getting better at it.

I check the Radar panel and, sure enough, the Blip-A is approaching!

Not a cylinder this time.

The whole ship is coming my way.

Nice and slow.

Maybe they're going for a nonthreatening kind of approach?

In any event, it's almost here.

Looks like its hull has a new addition.

In that diamond part that's as big as the whole Hail Mary, there's a cylindrical tube sticking straight up.

The hull robot is sitting next to it, looking proud of itself.

I may be anthropomorphizing a tad.

The tube looks like xenonite.

Patchy gray and tan with grainlike lines running its length.

Hard to tell from this angle, but it also looks to be hollow.

I think I know what comes next.

If they follow the plan they indicated with the model, they'll be putting the other end of it against my airlock.

How will they attach their tunnel?

My airlock does have docking capability-probably for whatever ship brought me and my crewmates to the Hail Mary-but I can't expect Eridians to know the intricacies of a universal airlock.

The Blip-A edges ever closer.

What if there's a mistake?

What if they miscalculate?

What if they accidentally poke a hole in my hull?

I'm all that stands between humanity and extinction.

Will an alien math error doom my entire species?

I hustle to the airlock and pull on the EVA suit.

I'm in there in record time.

Better safe than sorry.

The Blip-A is so close now, the Telescope screen just shows a patch of mottled hull.

I switch to the external cameras.

My hull is littered with them.

They're all controlled from a window on the EVA panel.

Always good to know where your astronaut is when giving them EVA instructions, I guess.

The tunnel is about 20 feet long.

Or 7 meters.

Man, being an American scientist sucks sometimes.

You think in random, unpredictable units based on what situation you're in.

The hull robot reaches out with some seriously telescoping arms.

I had no idea it could do that.

It extends well beyond the tunnel toward my airlock.

Not creepy at all.

Five ever-growing alien robot arms reaching for my front door.

No cause for alarm.

Each arm's three-fingered "hand"

is holding...something.

A curved bar with a flat plate attached on the ends.

Like a coffee- mug handle.

Three of the arms reach the Hail Mary and stick the flat parts of their devices to the hull.

Shortly after, the other two arms do the same.

Then, all five retract, pulling the Hail Mary toward the tunnel.

Okay.

So those flat things are handles.

How are they attached?

Good question!

My hull is smooth and made of nonmagnetic aluminum (why do I remember that all of a sudden?).

The handles certainly aren't connected by any mechanical means.

Must be an adhesive.

And it all starts to make sense.

Of course they aren't going to work out how the docking mechanism works.

They're going to glue one end of the tunnel to my ship.

Why not?

Much simpler.

My ship groans.

It's a 100,000-kilogram piece of equipment that was definitely not designed to be pulled along by its airlock.

Will the hull put up with this?

I double-check the seals on my EVA suit.

The control room moves around me.

It's not fast-just a few centimeters per second.

Hey, for small spaceship velocities I think in metric!

Much better than "cubits per fortnight"

or whatever.

I let the wall catch up to me.

At some lizard-brain level, I like being a little farther from the airlock.

Some scary stuff is going on over there.

Clunk.

The Eridian tunnel has hit the hull.

Clicks and scrapes follow.

I watch the hull camera feeds.

The mouth of the tunnel, now firmly held to the airlock aperture, is larger than the entire airlock door.

I guess that's that.

Presuming the glue will hold pressure.

They don't even know what my atmospheric pressure is.

What's the glue made of?

So many questions.

I can't operate the control-room panels with my EVA suit gloves.

I wish I could zoom in or something.

I squint at one of the feeds showing the tunnel.

It sure looks tight against the hull to me.

There's some curvature to the hull around that spot.

Kind of a complicated shape to make, but the Eridians duplicated it perfectly.

After another minute, the robot arms let go of their handles, leaving them on the hull.

A muffled sound comes from the airlock.

It's a whooshing sound.

Is that airflow?

They're pressurizing the tunnel!

My heart races.

Can my hull handle this?

What if their air dissolves aluminum?

What if aluminum is highly toxic to Eridians and one whiff of it kills them instantly?

This is a terrible idea!

The whooshing stops.

I gulp.

They're done.

Nothing dissolved yet.

I float over to the airlock for a look-see.

I had both airlock doors sealed, of course.

More protection in case of a breach.

I open the inner door and float inside.

I peek out the porthole window.

The blackness of space gone, replaced with the blackness of a dark tunnel.

I turn on the helmet lamps and angle my head to shine light through the porthole.

The end of the tunnel is too close.

I don't mean I'm bothered by it.

I mean the end of it is not 20 feet away.

It's more like 10 feet.

And while the rest of the tunnel is made of gray and tan blotchy xenonite, the wall at the end is a hexagonal pattern of random colors.

They didn't just connect a tunnel.

They connected my airlock to theirs, with a wall in the middle.

Clever.

I close the inner airlock door with me inside and depressurize it.

I spin the outer door's hatch handle and push.

It opens without resistance.

The tunnel is a vacuum-at least, it is on my side of the divider.

I think I see.

This is a test.

They had all the same concerns I had.

Attach it, let me pressurize my half with my air, and see what happens.

Either it works or it doesn't.

If it works, great!

If not, they'll try something else.

Or maybe ask me to try something.

Okay.

Let's see.

I tell the airlock to repressurize.

It refuses-the outer door is open.

Nice to know that safety interlock is there, but I'll have to work around it.

It's not hard-there's a manual relief valve that will just let air from the ship into the airlock.

It bypasses all computer controls.

You don't want someone to die because of a software malfunction, right?

I open the relief valve.

Air rushes in from the Hail Mary and, with the airlock wide open, into the tunnel.

Within three minutes, the airflow slows and then stops.

My suit readings tell me there's 400 hectopascals of pressure outside.

The Hail Mary has equalized with my part of the tunnel.

I close the relief valve and wait.

I watch the external pressure gauge on my EVA suit.

The pressure stays put at 400 hectopascals.

We have a good seal.

Eridians know how to glue xenonite to aluminum.

Of course they do.

Aluminum's an element, and any species that could invent xenonite in the first place must know their way around the periodic table a thousand times better than we do.

Time for a leap of faith.

I pop the seals of the EVA suit and climb out the back.

The strong smell of ammonia permeates the air but it's otherwise breathable.

It's my own air supply, after all.

I push the EVA suit back toward the airlock.

The helmet lamps are my only source of light, so I finagle the suit so the lights stay pointed down the tunnel.

I float over to the mystery wall and reach out to touch it, but stop short.

I can feel the heat even from a few inches away.

Eridians like it hot.

In fact, I'm starting to sweat.

The tunnel walls are heating up my air.

It's uncomfortable, but not too bad.

I can open the Hail Mary's inner airlock door if I want my climate control to take over.

Then our life-support systems can fight it out.

They'll keep the hot side hot and I'll keep the cold side cold.

Even with the sweat forming on my brow and the strong ammonia odor making my eyes water, I press on.

I'm just too curious not to.

Could anyone blame me?

There are at least twenty little hexagons on this wall.

They're all different colors and textures and I think a couple of them might be translucent.

I should catalog each one and figure out if I can identify what they're made of.

Looking closer, I see there's a definite seam running along the edges of the hexes.

That's when I hear a sound come from the other side: Knock, knock, knock.

T hey knocked, so it's only polite for me to knock back.

I know that wall is going to be hot, so I rap my knuckles on it as fast as I can.

I knock three times, just like they did.

There's no immediate response.

I take a good long look at the hex wall.

There are forty hexes, I'd say, and each one seems to be unique.

Different materials, maybe?

I feel like I'm supposed to do something here, but what?

Are they watching me?

I don't see anything that looks like a camera.

I hold up my finger and point back to my airlock.

I don't know if they can see me or if they have any idea what that hand gesture means.

I kick off the hex wall and back to the airlock, and then I open the inner door.

Why not?

The pressure is the same on both sides.

It's okay to leave the airlock open.

If there's a pressure loss in that tunnel, the air leaving the ship will slam the inner airlock door shut and I'll get to stay alive.

I go to the lab and pack a bag with a few choice items, then return to the tunnel.

First I tape LED lamps to various spots along the tunnel and aim them at the hex wall.

Now I can see what I'm doing, at least.

I pull out my trusty handheld x-ray spectrometer and scan one of the hexes.

It's xenonite.

Almost the same composition as the cylinders they sent me earlier.

Almost.

There are a few differences in the trace elements.

Interesting.

Maybe xenonite is like steel-lots of different recipes?

I check the next hex over.

Another slightly unique combination.

Best guess: Different types of xenonite are optimal for different situations.

They had no idea what my air was like.

So they want to test various compounds against it.

When I leave the tunnel, they'll inspect the hexes to decide which one fares best.

That means I should leave the tunnel.

Should I depressurize my side for them?

Seems polite.

I could easily do it-I'd just tell the airlock to cycle.

It would think, "Golly, there sure is a lot of air in me today!"

but would just keep pumping until there was a vacuum.

But then again, maybe they have a way of sampling the air on this side.

If so, I should leave it here, right?

I decide to leave it be.

They probably have a sampling technique.

If I were making this tunnel, that's what I'd do, and they seem pretty bright.

I turn back toward the airlock, but something catches my eye.

Movement!

I shoot my attention back to the hex wall.

Nothing's changed.

But I could swear I saw something move.

Some of the hexes are shiny-I probably caught a glimpse of my reflection.

Wait...

One hex stands out.

Why?

It's near the tunnel wall.

Not very obvious.

I float over to take a closer look.

"Holy cow!"

I say.

This hex is clear!

All the others are opaque, but this one is like glass!

I pull one of the lamps off the wall and hold it up to the hex.

I press my head against the hot wall to get a closer look.

Light gets through into the other side.

I can see the tunnel walls beyond.

Either their side is a vacuum or their air is clear.

Either way, there's nothing blocking or dulling my view.

Suddenly, a rock hits the other side of the hex.

It stays there.

It's just a few inches away from me.

It's roughly triangular, kind of a dark brown, and has rough, jagged edges.

Like you might see on the tip of a spear from a caveman.

Have I met spacefaring cavemen?

Stop being stupid, Ryland.

Why did they put a rock there?

And is it sticky?

Are they trying to block my view?

If so, they're doing a terrible job.

The little triangle is only a couple of inches wide at the thickest point and the hex is a good 8 inches across.

And it gets sillier.

Now the rock is bending at articulated joints, and there are two similar rocks that do the same thing, and there's a longer rock attached to them that- That's not a rock.

It's a claw!

It's a claw with three fingers!

I'm desperate to see more!

I press my face against the hex.

It burns, but I resist the urge to pull away.

There's pain, yes, and it's probably going to leave a mark.

I should go back to the lab and find a camera, but come on.

No one would have that presence of mind at a time like this.

I groan as my face aches, but I'm rewarded with a better view.

The alien's claw-er...I'll call it a hand.

That's less scary.

The alien's hand has three triangular fingers, each one with articulation points.

Knuckles, I guess.

They can close up into a raindrop shape or widen out to a sort of three-legged starfish.

The skin is weird.

It looks like brownish-black rock.

It's irregular and bumpy, like someone carved the hand out of granite and hasn't gotten around to smoothing it out yet.

Natural armor, maybe?

Like a turtle shell but less organized?

There's an arm too.

I can barely see it from this angle, no matter how hard I stupidly press my face into the Hot Wall of Pain.

But there's definitely an arm leading away from the hand.

I mean, there'd have to be, right?

Not just a magic floating hand.

I can't take the pain anymore.

I pull my head away.

I feel my face.

It's pretty raw, but there aren't any blisters.

Tap-tap-tap.

The alien is tapping the clear hex with a finger.

So I flick it with my finger three times.

It taps the hex again, three times.

So I tap again as well.

Then comes something creepy.

The cla-hand-retreats and returns with an object and holds it against the clear hexagon.

Whatever it is, it's small.

I let myself drift closer to the wall for a better look.

The heat warms my face.

The object is xenonite, of course.

It's about a half-inch high and finely detailed.

It looks like a doll.

But it has an oversized head and really thick arms and legs- "Oh!"

It's me.

It's a teeny, tiny Russian Orlan-MKS2 EVA suit.

That's all they've seen of me so far.

Another hand shows up.

Hey, I have two hands, so I shouldn't be surprised that they do too.

The second hand holds a model of the Hail Mary.

It looks to be at the same scale as the figurine of me.

The hands then push the little me into the little Hail Mary's airlock.

Pretty clear.

It's saying, Go back into your ship.

I give a thumbs-up.

The alien releases Mini-Me and the Hail Mary model to float away.

Then it contorts a hand into something resembling a thumbs-up.

It's just two fingers curled into a ball with the third pointed up.

At least it's not the middle one that's pointed up.

I return to the Hail Mary and close the airlock door behind me.

I pant and wheeze with excitement.

I can't believe that just happened.

That's an alien.

I just saw an alien.

Not just an alien ship.

An alien being.

I mean-just his claw-er...hand.

But yeah.

Well, I say "his hand,"

but maybe it's her hand.

Or some other pronoun I don't have a word for.

They might have seventeen biological sexes, for all I know.

Or none.

No one ever talks about the really hard parts of first contact with intelligent alien life: pronouns.

I'm going to go with "he"

for now, because it just seems rude to call a thinking being "it."

Also, until I hear otherwise, his name is Rocky.

- Okay, now what?

Rocky told me to go back into my ship.

So I did.

I feel kind of stupid.

There's a whole bunch of science I should be doing, right?

I peek through the airlock porthole.

My lamps are still taped to the walls in the tunnel and I can see there have been some...

changes.

The hex wall is gone.

Just plain gone.

I can see all the way to the Blip-A's hull.

And there's a hull robot attached to it reaching out and doing stuff with its little robot hands.

And yeah, its hands look like Rocky's hands, broadly speaking.

Three fingers.

About the same size as Rocky's hands.

Probably controlled with a Nintendo Power Glove kind of thing inside the ship.

Man, I'm old.

The robot takes a particular interest in my lamps.

Heck, I'd take an interest too.

Those are alien artifacts with alien technology.

Sure, they're just lights, but they're alien lights to my Eridian friends over there.

Probably the most exciting scientific find of their history.

The robot arm puts them in a little cubby on the Blip-A hull and a latch closes.

I bet those are going to be the most heavily studied lamps in the history of lamps.

I'm glad they got to have that moment of discovery and all, but they took my light source away.

I can hear the occasional clunk but it's pitch-dark in there.

That's interesting in and of itself.

I'm not an alien from 40 Eridani, but if I were working with a remote-controlled robot, I'd have a camera on it somewhere and a light source to see what I was doing.

But they don't need that.

They don't need light.

Well, hold on.

Their visible spectrum might be completely different from ours.

Humans only see a tiny fraction of all the wavelengths of light out there.

We evolved to see the wavelengths that are most plentiful on Earth.

Maybe Eridians evolved to see different wavelengths.

The room could be well illuminated with infrared or ultraviolet light and I wouldn't see a thing.

Hmm.

A robot.

Why a robot?

They had a living being there a few minutes ago-my boy Rocky.

Why replace him with a robot?

Vacuum.

They probably took all the air out of the tunnel.

They have a sample of my hull-they know it's made of aluminum and roughly how thick it is.

Maybe they aren't sure if my ship can handle outside pressure.

Or maybe their atmosphere reacts badly with aluminum.

So they keep the tunnel a vacuum, which means they have to do work with a robot.

I feel like Sherlock Holmes.

All I saw was "nothing,"

and I drew a bunch of conclusions!

Conclusions that are wildly speculative and with nothing to prove them, but conclusions!

I could get another lamp-the lab has a few more.

I could shine it in there to see what Robo-Rocky is doing.

But I'll know soon enough.

And I don't want to be in some other part of the ship if something interesting happens.

Just as I'm thinking that, something interesting happens.

Knock-knock-knock.

No, that's not creepy at all.

Being in a spaceship twelve light- years from home and having someone knock on the door is totally normal.

Okay, now I need another lamp.

I pinball down to the lab to grab another one, then back up to the control room.

I cycle the airlock without bothering to put on the EVA suit.

I turn the manual vent valves on both doors of the airlock to repressurize the tunnel.

It works just like I expect.

There's still a good seal out there.

I open the outer door and float in, lamp in hand.

The hex wall is gone-it's been replaced by a solid wall of clear material.

And on the other side of that wall is Rocky.

He's a spider.

A big-assed spider.

I turn to flee.

But my rational brain takes over.

"Easy...easy...they're friendly,"

I say to myself.

I turn back and take in the scene.

Rocky is smaller than a human.

He's about the size of a Labrador.

He has five legs radiating out from a central carapace- looking thing.

The carapace, which is roughly a pentagon, is 18 inches across and half as thick.

I don't see eyes or a face anywhere.

Each leg has a joint in the middle-I'll call it an elbow.

Each leg (or should I say arm?) ends in a hand.

So he's got five hands.

Each hand has those triangular fingers I got a good look at last time.

Looks like all five hands are the same.

I don't see any "front"

or "back"

to him.

He appears to be pentagonally symmetrical.

He wears clothing.

The legs are bare, showing the rocklike skin, but there's cloth on the carapace.

Sort of like a shirt with five armholes.

I don't know what the shirt is made of but it looks thicker than typical human clothing.

It's a dull greenish-brown, and inconsistently shaded.

The top of the shirt has a large open hole.

Like where the neck goes on a human's T-shirt.

That hole is smaller than the carapace.

So he must have to put that shirt on by pulling it downward and sliding the arms through their respective holes.

Again, like a human's shirt.

But there's no neck or head to go through that hole on top.

Just a hard-looking rocky pentagon that sticks up a little bit from the crusty skin.

On his side of the tunnel, he has handles and latticework on the walls.

He casually hangs on to a couple of bars with two of his hands.

I guess when you have five hands, zero g isn't that big a deal.

Just allocate a hand or two for keeping in one place and use the other three to do stuff.

For me, the tunnel is kind of small.

But for him it's absolutely spacious.

He waves to me with a free arm.

He knows one human greeting and by golly he plans to use it.

I wave back.

He waves again.

I shake my head.

No more waving.

He pivots his "shoulders"

to rotate his carapace back and forth.

He "shook his head"

inasmuch as he could.

I wonder how we're going to break out of this game of "Eridian See Eridian Do,"

but he takes care of that for me.

He taps the clear wall three times with a finger, then keeps the finger extended.

Is he...pointing?

I follow the line and wow, there's stuff in the tunnel with me!

They left me a present!

I can be forgiven for not noticing.

Seeing an alien kind of distracted me from the small collection of objects on the tunnel wall.

"All right,"

I say.

"Let's see what you left me."

","

says Rocky.

My jaw drops.

Yes, I'm in zero g.

It still drops.

There was no pronunciation or inflection of the sounds.

Just notes.

Like whale song.

Except not quite like whale song, because there were several at once.

Whale chords, I guess.

And he was responding to me.

That means he can hear too.

And notably, the sounds were in my range of hearing.

Some of the notes were low, some of them high.

But definitely audible.

That alone is amazing when I think about it.

He's from a different planet, and totally different evolutionary line, but we ended up with compatible sound ranges.

On top of all that, he decided my noises warranted a response.

"You have a language!"

I say.

"How do you have a language?!

You don't have a mouth!"

","

Rocky explains.

Thinking rationally, you can't make spaceships without a civilization and you can't have civilization without being able to communicate.

So of course they have language.

It's interesting that communication is done with sound, like humans do.

Coincidence?

Maybe not.

Maybe that's just the easiest way to evolve that trait.

"."

Rocky points to the objects they left me.

"Right, right,"

I say.

The whole language thing is way more interesting to me, and I'd rather explore that.

But for now, Rocky wants to know what I think of his presents.

I float over to the objects.

They're attached to the wall with my own tape.

The objects are a pair of spheres.

Each one has a raised image embossed on it.

One has the Hail Mary and the other has the Blip-A.

I pull the Hail Mary ball off the tape.

It's not warm.

In fact, the tunnel isn't warm anymore.

Interesting.

Maybe they noticed I like things cooler and they did something to make it more comfortable for me.

There's a rattle from inside the ball.

I shake it and listen.

More rattling.

I find a seam.

I rotate the top and bottom of the ball against each other and sure enough, they rotate.

Left-handed screw, of course.

I look to Rocky for approval.

He has no face and thus no facial expressions.

He just floats there, watching me.

Well, not watching...no eyes.

Actually, wait.

How does he know what I'm doing?

He clearly knows-he waved and stuff.

He must have eyes somewhere.

I probably just don't recognize them.

I turn my attention back to the sphere.

I pull the two halves apart and inside is...a bunch more little spheres.

I sigh.

This raises more questions than it answers.

The little beads float out and drift across my field of view.

They're not individual items.

They're connected to one another by little strings.

Like a complicated necklace.

I spread it out as best I can.

They look like-for lack of a better term-beaded handcuffs.

Two circles of threaded beads connected to each other by a little bridge of thread.

Each circle has eight beads on it.

The connecting thread has none.

This seems very deliberate.

But I have no idea what it means.

Maybe the other ball-the one with the Blip-A picture on it- will shed more light.

I let the handcuffs float and pull the Blip-A ball off the wall.

I shake it and hear lots of rattling from inside.

I unscrew the two halves and another set of beads comes out.

Unlike the handcuffs, there's only one ring in this construction.

And it has seven beads, not eight.

Also, it has three connector strings sticking out of the circle and leading to a single bead each.

Kind of like a necklace with some ornamentation hanging off of it.

There's more stuff inside.

I shake the model and another necklace floats out.

I take a look and it's identical to the one I just inspected.

I keep shaking and more and more necklaces come out.

Each one the same.

I collect them all and stuff them in my pockets.

"This reminds me of something..."

I thump my forehead.

"What does this remind me of...?"

Rocky taps his carapace with a claw.

I know he's just mimicking my movements but it feels like he's saying, Think, dummy!

What would I tell my students at a time like this?

Why did I suddenly think of my students?

I got an image of my classroom.

A flash of memory.

I'm holding a model of a molecule and explaining- "Molecules!"

I grab the handcuffs and hold them out to Rocky.

"These are molecules!

You're trying to tell me something about chemistry!"

"."

But wait.

These are some weird molecules.

They make no sense.

I look at the handcuffs.

Nothing forms a molecule like this.

Eight atoms on one side, eight on the other, and connected by...what?

Nothing?

The connector string isn't even coming off a bead.

It's just teeing off strings from the two circles.

"Atoms!"

I say.

"The beads are protons.

So the circles of beads are atoms.

And the little connectors are chemical bonds!"

"Okay, if that's the case..."

I hold up the handcuffs and count everything again.

"Then this is two atoms, each with eight protons, connected to each other.

Element number eight is oxygen.

Two oxygens.

O2!

And it was in the Hail Mary ball."

I hold it toward Rocky.

"You clever fellow, this is my atmosphere!"

I grab the other set of beads.

"So your atmosphere is...seven protons connected to three individual atoms with one proton each.

A nitrogen attached to three hydrogens.

Ammonia!

Of course it's ammonia!

You breathe ammonia!"

That explains the pervasive smell on all of the little presents they left me.

Residual traces of their air.

My smile fades.

"Yikes.

You breathe ammonia?"

I count all the little ammonia necklaces they gave me.

I only got one O2 molecule, but he gave me twenty-nine ammonias.

I think about it for a moment.

"Oh,"

I say.

"I get it.

I see what you're saying."

I look to my alien counterpart.

"You have twenty-nine times as much atmosphere as I do."

Wow.

Two things come immediately to mind: First, Eridians live in immense pressure.

Like-similar to being a thousand feet deep in the ocean back on Earth.

Secondly, xenonite is some amazing stuff.

I don't know how thick that wall is-half an inch, maybe?

Less?

But it's holding back a relative pressure of 28 atmospheres.

All while being a big, un-reinforced flat panel (the absolute worst way to make a pressure vessel).

Heck, their whole ship is made of big flat panels.

The tensile strength of that stuff must be off the charts.

No wonder I couldn't bend or break the things they sent earlier.

We don't have remotely compatible environments.

I'd die in seconds if I were on his side of the tunnel.

And my guess is he wouldn't do well in one twenty-ninth his normal atmospheric pressure and with no ammonia at all.

Okay, not a problem.

We have sound and we can pantomime.

That's a good start for communication.

I take a moment to let this all sink in.

This is amazing stuff.

I have an alien buddy here, and we're chatting!

I can barely contain myself!

The problem is-I haven't contained myself.

Fatigue washes over me so hard I can barely concentrate.

It's been two days since I slept.

There's just always been something monumental going on.

I can't just stay up forever.

I need to sleep.

I hold up a finger.

The "hang on a sec"

motion.

Hopefully he remembers it from last time.

He holds up a finger on one of his hands to match.

I rush back into the ship and careen down to the lab.

There's an analog clock on the wall.

Because every lab needs an analog clock.

It takes some doing, but I pull it off the wall and put it under my arm.

I also grab a dry-erase marker from the workstation.

Back I go, through the control room and into the Tunnel of Aliens.

Rocky is still there.

He seems to perk up when I return.

How could I know that?

I don't know.

He just kind of repositioned himself and seems more attentive.

I show him the clock.

I spin the time-set dial in the back.

I just want him to see how the hands move around.

He makes a circular motion with a hand.

He gets it!

I set the clock to 12:00.

Then I use the dry-erase marker to draw a long line from the center toward the twelve and a short line from the center to the two.

I'd rather sleep a solid eight hours, but I don't want to keep Rocky waiting too long.

I'll settle for a two-hour nap.

"I'll come back when the clock matches this,"

I say.

As if that would help him understand.

"."

He makes a gesture.

He reaches forward with two of his hands and grabs...nothing.

And then he pulls the nothing toward him.

"What?"

He taps the wall and points to the clock, then repeats the gesture.

Does he want the clock to be closer to the wall?

I push the clock closer.

This seems to excite him.

He makes the gesture more rapidly.

I move it further forward.

The clock is almost touching the wall now.

He does the gesture one more time, but this time a little slower.

At this point, I have no idea what he wants.

So I just push the clock up against the wall.

It's touching now.

He raises his hands and kind of shakes them.

Alien jazz hands.

Is that a good thing?

Okay, I hope he understands I'll be back in two hours.

I turn to leave but immediately hear tap-tap-tap.

"Whaaat?"

I say.

","

he says, pointing to the clock.

It drifted a little bit away from the wall.

He doesn't like that.

"Um, okay,"

I say.

I pull a loop of tape off the wall, unloop it, and rip it in half.

I use the two halves to tape the left and right sides of the clock to the clear wall.

Rocky gives me the jazz hands signal again.

I think it means "yes"

or "I approve of this."

Like nodding.

I turn to leave again, but tap-tap-tap!

I spin around once more.

"Dude, I just want a darn nap!"

He holds up a finger.

Using my own sign language against me.

Now I have to wait!

I guess that's fair.

I hold up my finger to acknowledge it.

He opens a circular door leading into his ship.

It's the right size for an Eridian-I would have a hard time squeezing through if that ever became a plan.

He disappears inside, leaving the door open.

I'd love to know what's beyond the door, but I can't see anything.

It's pitch-black in there.

Hmm.

Interesting.

It is completely dark in his ship.

That door probably leads to an airlock.

But even an airlock would have some lights in it, wouldn't it?

Rocky didn't have any problem getting around.

But I know he can see-he responds to my gestures.

This lends strength to my earlier theory about Eridian vision: I think they see a different part of the spectrum than humans do.

Maybe they see entirely in infrared or entirely in ultraviolet.

That airlock might be perfectly lit up as far as Rocky's concerned and I can't see a thing.

Conversely, my lights are completely useless to him.

I wonder if we have any wavelengths in common.

Maybe red (the color with the lowest wavelength that humans can see) is "

,"

the highest wavelength they can see.

Or something.

Might be worth looking into.

I should bring a rainbow of lights in and find out if he can-oh, he's back.

Rocky bounces into the tunnel and spider-walks along the rails to the dividing wall.

He's incredibly graceful at it.

Either he's very seasoned at being in zero g or Eridians are just really good at climbing around.

They have five hands with opposable fingers, and he's an interstellar traveler, so it's probably a little bit of both.

With one of his hands, he holds a device up for me to see.

It's...I don't know what it is.

It's a cylinder (man, these people like cylinders), a foot long and maybe 6 inches wide.

I can see that his grip deforms the casing a little bit.

It's made of a soft material, like foam rubber.

The cylinder has five horizontally aligned square windows.

Inside each window is a shape.

I think they might be letters.

But they're not just ink on paper.

They're on a flat surface, but the symbols themselves are raised an eighth of an inch or so.

"Huh,"

I say.

The symbol on the right rotates away to be replaced by a new symbol.

After a couple of seconds it happens again.

Then again.

"It's a clock!"

I say.

"I showed you a clock, so you showed me a clock!"

I point to my clock, still taped to the wall, and then to his.

He does the jazz hands with two of the hands he's not using at the moment.

I do jazz hands back.

I watch the Eridian clock for a while.

Rocky just holds it in place for me to see.

The symbols-numbers, probably-cycle through on the rightmost window.

They're on a rotor.

Like an old-school digital clock back home.

After a while, the rotor one step to the left of it changes one position.

Aha!

As far as I can tell, the right rotor changes once every two seconds.

A little more than two seconds, I think.

It cycles through six unique symbols before repeating: "l,"

"I,"

"V,"

","

"+,"

and "V,"

in that order.

Whenever it reaches "

l,"

the next rotor to the left advances one step.

Eventually, after about a minute of this, that second-from-the-right rotor works its way through all the symbols, and when it reaches "l,"

the third rotor from the right advances.

Looks like they read information from left to right-same as English.

Neat coincidence.

Though not incredibly unlikely.

I mean, there's really only four options: left to right, right to left, top to bottom, or bottom to top.

So there was a 1 in 4 chance we'd be the same.

So his clock is intuitive for me to read.

And it works like an odometer.

"l"

is clearly their 0.

From that, I know that "I"

is 1, "V"

is 2, ""

is 3, "+"

is 4, and "V"

is 5.

What about 6 through 9?

They don't exist.

After "V"

we go back to "l."

Eridians use base six.

Of all the things I teach my students, numerical bases are the hardest to make them truly understand.

There's nothing special about the number 10.

We have ten unique digits because we have ten fingers.

Simple as that.

Rockies have three fingers per hand and I guess they only like to use two hands when counting (they probably keep the other three feet/hands on the ground to stay steady).

So they have six fingers to work with.

"I like you, Rocky!

You're a genius!"

And he is!

With this simple act, Rocky showed me: How Eridian numbers work (base six) How Eridian numbers are written (l, I, V, ,+, V) How Eridians read information (left to right) How long an Eridian second is I hold up a finger and rush back into the ship to get my stopwatch.

I come back and time Rocky's clock.

I start the timer just as the third rotor changes state.

The right rotor continues clicking over every two seconds or so, and every six steps, the next rotor advances one.

This is going to take a while, but I want as accurate a count as possible.

It takes around a minute and a half for the third rotor to move just one step.

I can expect to be at this for ten minutes or so.

But I plan to watch the whole time.

Rocky gets bored.

At least, I think that's what happens.

He starts fidgeting, and then lets the clock float in place near the divider wall.

Then he wanders around his side of the tunnel.

I'm not sure if he's doing anything in particular.

He opens a door leading into his ship, begins to climb through, and then stops.

He seems to think it over, then changes his mind.

He closes the door.

He doesn't want to leave while I'm still here.

After all, I might do or say something interesting.

","

he says.

"I know, I know,"

I say.

I hold up a finger.

He holds up his finger, then returns to slowly bouncing from wall to wall.

Zero-g pacing.

Finally, the third rotor completes a full lap and I stop my timer.

Total time: 511.0 seconds.

I don't have a calculator, and I'm too excited to go back into the ship to get one.

I pull out a pen and do long division on the palm of my other hand.

One Eridian second is 2.366 Earth seconds.

I circle the answer on my palm and stare at it.

I add a few exclamation points nearby because I feel like they're warranted.

I know it doesn't seem like much, but this is a huge deal.

Rocky and I are astronauts.

If we're going to talk, we're going to talk science.

And just like that, Rocky and I have established a fundamental unit of time.

Next up: length and mass!

No, actually.

Next up-a nap.

I'm so tired.

I pull my clock off the wall, circle the "2"

with my dry-erase marker-just to be as clear as possible, then tape it back in place.

I wave.

He waves back.

Then I go back for a nap.

- This is ridiculous.

How can I expect to sleep?

How could anyone under these circumstances?

I'm still wrapping my head around what's happening.

There's an alien out there.

And it's killing me that I can't find out what he knows about Astrophage.

But you can't talk about complex scientific concepts with someone via pantomime.

We need a shared language, however rudimentary.

I just need to keep doing what I'm doing.

Work on science communication.

The verbs and nouns of physics.

It's the one set of concepts we're guaranteed to share-physical laws are the same everywhere.

And once we have enough words to actually talk about science, we'll start talking about Astrophage.

And in "VVlI"

Eridian seconds I'll be talking to him again.

How the heck can a guy sleep at a time like this?

There's no way I can just- M y timer beeps at me.

I'd set it for a two-hour countdown.

It just reached zero.

I blink a couple of times.

I'm floating in a fetal position in the control room.

I didn't even make it to the dormitory.

I am not rested at all.

Every pore of my being yells at me to go back to sleep, but I told Rocky I'd be back in two hours and I wouldn't want him to think humans are untrustworthy.

I mean...we're pretty untrustworthy, but I don't want him to know that.

I trudge (can you trudge in zero g?

I say yes) through the airlock.

Rocky is there waiting for me in the tunnel.

He's been busy in my absence.

There's all sorts of stuff in there now.

The Eridian clock is still ticking away-now mounted to one of the lattice poles.

But more interesting to me is the box that's been added to the dividing wall.

It's a 1-foot cube and it juts out into my half of the tunnel.

It's made of the same transparent xenonite that the rest of the wall is made of.

On Rocky's side, the box has a flat panel door with an opaque xenonite border.

Also, there's a square hole with a perfectly fitted square pipe leading away.

There are some...controls?...on the pipe near the box.

Buttons, maybe?

A wire coming from the control box snakes along the pipe, disappearing into the hull where the pipe does.

Meanwhile, on my side of the cube is a crank, roughly the same shape as my own airlock door's crank.

And that's attached to a square panel like the one on Rocky's side and- "It's an airlock!"

I said.

"You made an airlock in our airlock tunnel!"

Brilliant.

Simply brilliant.

Rocky and I can both access it.

He can control the air in that little chamber by means of the mystery pipe, which presumably leads back to some pumps or something in the Blip-A.

And those buttons or whatever are the controls.

Just like that, we have a way to transfer stuff back and forth.

I do jazz hands.

He does them back.

Hmm.

Again with the square, flat panels.

Who makes a square airlock?

Especially one designed to handle Eridian atmospheric pressure.

Even the pipe that runs the mini-airlock is square.

I know they can make round xenonite-the cylinders he sent me when we first met were round.

This tunnel is round.

Maybe I'm overthinking this.

Xenonite is so strong you don't have to carefully shape it into pressure vessels.

Flat panels are probably easier to make.

This is awesome.

I hold up a finger-he returns the gesture.

I fly down to the lab and grab a tape measure.

He showed me a unit of time, so I'll show him a unit of length.

The tape measure is metric, thank God.

It's going to be confusing enough using base-6 Eridian seconds.

The last thing I want to throw in there is imperial units-even if they are natural to me.

Back in the tunnel, I hold up the tape measure.

I pull it out a bit, then release it to let it retract.

I repeat the process a few times.

He does jazz hands.

I point to the "squarelock"

(well, what else should I call it?) and he does jazz hands again.

I hope that means there isn't 29 atmospheres of ammonia in there at the moment.

I guess we'll see....

I turn the crank and open my door.

It swings outward toward me easily.

Nothing explodes.

In fact, I don't even smell ammonia.

And it wasn't a vacuum in there either.

I wouldn't have been able to pull the door open at all if it had been.

Rocky set that up to be exactly my atmosphere.

Considerate of him.

I put the tape measure in the approximate center of the box and let it float there.

I close the door and turn the crank.

Rocky presses a button on the controls and I hear a muffled fwump followed by a steady hiss.

A foggy gas rushes in from the pipe.

Ammonia, presumably.

The tape measure bounces inside -pushed around like a leaf in the wind.

Soon, the hiss dulls to a trickle.

And then I realize my mistake.

The tape measure is one of those solid, construction-site kinds that are made of metal with tool-grade rubber grip pads.

Thing is, Eridians like it hot.

How hot?

I can't say for sure, but I now know it's hotter than the melting point of the rubber on the tape measure.

The blob of liquid rubber undulates on the tape measure, sticking to the tool via surface tension.

Rocky opens his door and carefully grabs my faulty present by the metal.

At least that's still solid.

I think it's made of aluminum.

It's nice to know Eridian air isn't hot enough to melt that too.

As Rocky pulls the tape measure toward him, the rubber blob separates from it and floats off in his side of the tube.

He pokes the rubber blob and it sticks to his claw.

He shakes it off without much trouble.

Obviously the temperature doesn't bother him.

I guess it's no different from a human shaking water off his hand.

In my atmosphere, rubber that hot would burn.

There'd be all these nasty, noxious gases coming off of it too.

But there's no oxygen on Rocky's side of the wall.

So the rubber just kind of...stays a liquid.

It floats off to the tunnel wall and sticks there.

I shrug at him.

Maybe he'll know that means "I'm sorry."

He sort of shrugs back.

But he does it with all five shoulders.

Looks weird and I don't know if he caught my meaning.

He pulls the tape out a bit, then lets it snap back.

He's clearly surprised, even though he must have known it was coming.

He releases it entirely and lets it spin in front of him.

He grabs it and does it again.

Then again.

And again.

"Yeah, it's fun,"

I say.

"But look at the markings.

Those are centimeters.

CEN-TI-ME-TERS."

The next time he pulls the tape out, I point to the tape.

"Look!"

He just keeps pulling it out and back again.

I don't see any indication that he cares about what's written there.

"Ugh!"

I hold up a finger.

I go back to the lab and get another tape measure.

It's a well-stocked lab and no space mission would be complete without redundancy.

I come back to the tunnel.

Rocky is still playing with the tape measure.

Now he's really having a ball.

He pulls the tape out as far as he can, which is about a meter, then releases both the tape and the tape measure at the same time.

The resulting recoil and snap-back makes the tape measure spin wildly in front of him.

"!!!"

he says.

I'm pretty sure that was a squeal of glee.

"Look.

Look,"

I say.

"Rocky.

Rocky!

Yo!"

He finally stops playing with the unintentional toy.

I pull some tape out on my tape measure, then point to the markings.

"Look!

Here!

See these?"

He pulls his own out to approximately the same distance.

I can see the markings on his are still there-they didn't get baked off in the blistering Eridian heat or anything.

What is the problem?

I point at the 1-centimeter line.

"Look.

One centimeter.

This line.

Here."

I tap the line repeatedly.

He holds the tape out with two hands and taps it with a third.

He matches my tempo, but he's nowhere near the 1-centimeter mark.

"Here!"

I tap the mark harder.

"Are you blind?!"

I pause.

"Wait.

Are you blind?"

Rocky taps the tape some more.

I've always assumed he had eyes somewhere and I didn't recognize them.

But what if he doesn't have eyes at all?

The airlock of the Blip-A was dark, and Rocky didn't have any problem with it.

So I figured he saw in frequencies of light I can't see.

But the tape measure has white tape with black markings on it.

Any vision in any spectrum should be able to discern black on white.

Black is the absence of light and white is all frequencies equally reflected.

Wait-this doesn't make sense.

He knows what I'm doing.

He mimics my gestures.

If he doesn't have vision, how can he read my clock?

How can he read his own clock?

Hmm...his clock has thick numbers.

Like an eighth of an inch.

And, thinking back, he actually did have some trouble with my clock.

He needed me to tape it to the divider wall.

When it floated an inch away he got upset.

Just being close to the divider wasn't enough.

The clock had to be touching it.

"Sound?"

I say.

"Do you 'see' with sound?"

It would make sense.

Humans use electromagnetic waves to understand our three-dimensional environment.

So why couldn't a different species use sound waves?

Same principle-and we even have it on Earth.

Bats and dolphins use echolocation to "see"

with sound.

Maybe Eridians have that ability, but on steroids.

Unlike bats and dolphins, Eridians have passive sonar.

They use ambient sound waves to resolve their environment instead of making a specific noise to track prey.

Just a theory.

But it fits the data.

That's why his clock numbers are thick.

Because his sonar can't perceive things that are too thin.

My clock was a challenge to him.

He can't "see"

the ink, but the hands are solid objects.

So he knew about them.

But the whole thing is encased in plastic....

I slapped my forehead.

"That's why you needed the clock pressed against the wall.

You needed the sound waves bouncing around in it to get to you more easily.

And the tape measure I just handed you is useless.

You can't see the ink at all!"

He plays with the tape measure some more.

I hold up a finger.

He's more focused on the tape measure toy, but he absently returns the gesture with one of his spare hands.

I fly back into the ship, through the control room, and into the lab.

I grab a screwdriver and head farther down to the dormitory.

I detach a storage panel from the floor.

Simple aluminum sheet stock.

Maybe one-sixteenth of an inch thick, with the edges rounded so we don't cut ourselves.

Strong, durable, and light.

Perfect for space travel.

I fly back to the tunnel.

Rocky has wrapped one end of the tape around one of his tunnel's grab-handles and tied it in a somewhat crude knot.

He hangs on to the dispenser with one hand and uses the other four to climb backward along the bars.

"Hey,"

I say.

I hold up my hand.

"Hey!"

He stops playing with the tape measure for a moment.

"?"

I hold up two fingers.

Rocky holds up two fingers.

"Yeah.

Okay.

We're in mimic mode again."

I hold up one finger, then switch to two, then back to one, and then finally three.

Rocky repeats the sequence, just as I hoped he would.

Now I put the aluminum panel between my hand and Rocky.

Behind the panel, I hold up two fingers, then one, then three, then five.

Rocky holds up two fingers, then one, then all three.

He brings in a second hand to hold up two more fingers for a total of five.

"Wow!"

I say.

One-sixteenth-inch aluminum will stop pretty much all light.

Some absurdly high frequencies can get through, but those frequencies would also pass right through me.

So he wouldn't see my hands.

But sound travels through metals just fine.

That's proof.

He's not using light to perceive what's going on.

It has to be sound.

To Rocky, that metal plate is like a glass window.

Maybe it muddles the image a little, but not much.

Heck, he probably knows what the Hail Mary's control room looks like.

Why not?

The hull is just more aluminum.

How did he see me out in space?

No air in space.

So no sound.

Wait.

No.

That's a dumb question.

He's not a caveman wandering around in space.

He's an advanced interstellar traveler.

He has technology.

He probably has cameras and radar and stuff that translate data into something he can understand.

No different from my Petrovascope.

I can't see IR light, but it can and then it shows it to me on a monitor with light frequencies I can see.

The Blip-A control room probably has awesome-looking Braille-like readouts.

Well, I'm sure it's way more advanced than that.

"Wow..."

I stare at him.

"Humans spent thousands of years looking up at the stars and wondering what was out there.

You guys never saw stars at all but you still worked space travel.

What an amazing people you Eridians must be.

Scientific geniuses."

The knot in the tape comes loose, recoils wildly, and smacks Rocky's hand.

He shakes the affected hand in pain for a moment, then continues messing with the tape measure.

"Yeah.

You're definitely a scientist."

- "All rise,"

said the bailiff, "the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington is now in session.

The Honorable Justice Meredith Spencer presiding."

The entire courtroom stood as the judge took her seat.

"Be seated,"

the bailiff said.

He handed the justice a folder.

"Your Honor, today's case is Intellectual Property Alliance v.

Project Hail Mary."

The judge nodded.

"Plaintiff, are you ready for trial?"

The plaintiff's table was crowded with well-dressed men and women.

The eldest of them, a man in his sixties, stood to answer.

"We are, Your Honor."

"Defense, are you ready for trial?"

Stratt sat alone at the defense table, typing away on her tablet.

The justice cleared her throat.

"Defense?"

Stratt finished typing and stood.

"I'm ready."

Justice Spencer gestured to Stratt's table.

"Counselor, where is the rest of your team?"

"Just me,"

she said.

"And I'm not a counselor-I'm the defendant."

"Ms.

Stratt."

Spencer took off her glasses and glared.

"The defendant in this case is a rather famous intergovernmental consortium of scientists."

"Led by me,"

said Stratt.

"I move to dismiss."

"You can't make motions yet, Ms.

Stratt,"

said Spencer.

"Just tell me if you're ready to proceed."

"I'm ready,"

"All right.

Plaintiff, you may begin your opening statement."

The man stood.

"May it please the court and ladies and gentlemen of the jury, my name is Theodore Canton, counsel for the Intellectual Property Alliance in this action.

"During this trial, we will show that Project Hail Mary has overstepped its authority in the matter of digital data acquisition and licensing.

They have, in their possession, a gigantic solid- state-drive array upon which they have copied literally every as every single book and literary work that has ever been available in any digital format.

All of this was done without intellectual property owners.

Furthermore, many of their technological designs violate patents held by-"

"Your Honor,"

Stratt interrupted.

"Can I make motions now?"

"Technically,"

said the justice, "but it's irregul-"

"I move to dismiss."

"Your Honor!"

Canton protested.

"On what grounds, Ms.

Stratt?"

said the justice.

"Because I don't have time for this bullshit,"

she said.

"We are building a ship to literally save our species.

And we have very little time to get it done.

It will have three astronauts-just three-to do experiments we can't even conceive of now.

We need them to be prepared for any possible line of study they deem necessary.

So we are giving them everything.

The collected knowledge of humankind, along with all software.

Some of it is stupid.

They probably won't need Minesweeper for Windows 3.1, and they probably don't need an unabridged Sanskrit-to-English dictionary, but they're going to have them."

Canton shook his head.

"Your Honor, my clients don't dispute the noble nature of the Hail Mary Project.

The complaint is in mechanisms."

Stratt shook her head.

"It would take a ridiculous amount of time and energy to work out licensing agreements with every company.

So we're not doing it."

"I assure you, Ms.

Stratt, you will comply with the law,"

said the justice.

"Only when I want to."

Stratt held up a sheet of paper.

"According to this international treaty, I am personally immune from prosecution for any crime anywhere on Earth.

The United States Senate ratified that treaty two months ago."

She held up a second piece of paper.

"And to streamline situations like this, I also have a preemptive pardon from the president of the United States for any and all crimes I am accused of within U.S.

jurisdictions."

The bailiff took the papers and handed them to the justice.

"This..."

said the justice, "this is exactly what you say it is."

"I'm only here as a courtesy,"

said Stratt.

"I didn't have to come at all.

But since the software industry, patent trolls, and everyone else related to intellectual property banded together in one lawsuit, I figured it would be fastest to nip this in the bud all at once."

She grabbed her satchel and put the tablet inside.

"I'll be on my way."

"Hold on, Ms.

Stratt,"

said Justice Spencer.

"This is still a court of law, and you will remain for the duration of these proceedings!"

"No, I won't,"

said Stratt.

The bailiff walked forward.

"Ma'am.

I'll have to restrain you if you don't comply."

"You and what army?"

Stratt asked.

Five armed men in military fatigues entered the courtroom and took up station around her.

"Because I have the U.S.

Army,"

she said.

"And that's a damn fine army."

- I browse through my available software while munching on a peanut-butter tortilla.

I know that doesn't sound tasty, but it is.

I've learned how to grip the lab chair with my legs so I don't float off as I use the laptop.

Turns out I have a bunch of laptops.

At least six that I've found in the storage area so far.

And they're all connected to a shipwide Wi-Fi network.

Handy.

If memory serves, I should have pretty much all the software lurking around somewhere on the ship.

The trick is finding the one I need.

I wouldn't even know what it's called.

Fortunately, one of the books in the digital library is a list of software applications.

So that helped.

Ultimately I find something that will work: "Tympanum Labs Waveform Analyzer."

There are all sorts of waveform-analysis software packages in my library.

This one just has the highest reviews according to a 2017 computer magazine that reviewed waveform analyzers.

I install the software on one of the laptops.

It's pretty simple to use and has a plethora of features.

But the one I'm most interested in is the Fourier transform.

It's the most basic tool in sound-wave analysis and arguably the most important.

There's a lot of complicated math on how to make it happen, but the end result is this: if you run a sound wave through a Fourier transform, it will give you a list of the individual notes being played at the same time.

So if I played a C-major chord and let this app listen to it, the app would tell me there's a C, an E, and a G.

It's incredibly useful.

No more pantomime.

It's time to learn Eridianese.

Yes, I just made up that word.

No, I don't feel bad about it.

I'm doing a lot of things for the first time in human history out here and there's a lot of stuff that needs naming.

Just be glad I don't name stuff after myself.

I launch Microsoft Excel on another laptop and tape the two laptops together back to back.

Yes, I could just run both applications on one laptop, but I don't want to switch back and forth.

I fly up through the ship and back into the tunnel.

Rocky isn't there.

Hmph.

Rocky can't just spend all day waiting around for me, but why don't they have someone in the tunnel at all times?

If my crewmates were still around, we would definitely rotate a watch or something.

Heck, Ilyukhina would probably be camped out here nonstop and only leave when she had to sleep.

What if they are having different people in the tunnel?

How do I know Rocky is just one person?

I don't know how to tell Eridians apart.

Maybe I've been talking to six different people.

That's an unsettling thought.

No...that's not it.

I'm pretty sure Rocky is just Rocky.

The ridges on his carapace and rocky protrusions on his hands are unique.

I remember there's an irregular craggy bit sticking up out of one of his fingers...yeah.

It's the same guy.

If you looked at a rock for several hours, and someone replaced it with a very similar, but slightly different rock, you would know.

Okay, so where is the rest of the crew?

I'm alone because my crewmates didn't make it.

But Eridians have better technology, space-wise.

Bigger ship, nigh-indestructible hull material.

There has to be a crew in there.

Ah!

I bet Rocky's the captain!

He puts himself at risk by talking to the scary alien.

Everyone else stays back on the ship.

That's what Captain Kirk would do.

So why not Captain Rocky?

Anyway, I have cool stuff I want to do and I'm impatient.

"Yo!

Rocky!"

I yell.

"Come here!"

I listen for any sounds of movement.

"Come on, man!

Your entire ranged sensory input is sound-I bet you can hear a pin drop a mile away!

You know I'm calling you!

Move your...

whatever serves as your butt!

I want to talk!"

I wait and wait, but no Rocky.

My guess is I'm a pretty high priority to him.

So whatever he's doing must be really important.

After all, he's got a ship to deal with.

He probably needs to eat and sleep.

Well, he has to eat, anyway-all biological organisms need to get energy somehow.

I don't know if Eridians sleep.

Come to think of it...sleep might not be such a bad idea.

Out of the past forty-eight hours I've had a two-hour nap and nothing else.

Rocky's clock is still there, wedged between a grab bar and the divider wall.

It's ticking away as normal.

It's interesting that his clock only has five digits.

By my math, it'll roll over back to lllll every five hours or so.

Maybe that's the length of an Eridian day?

Speculate later.

Sleep is the priority.

I set up a spreadsheet on my Excel laptop to convert from Rocky time to mine and vice versa.

I want to sleep for eight hours.

I enter the current time on Rocky's clock, which is IlIV, and have the spreadsheet tell me what that clock will say eight hours from now.

The answer: I+VV.

I hurry back to the lab to pick up a bunch of Popsicle sticks and tape.

Rocky can't see ink, so I have to improvise.

I tape the sticks to the divider wall to let Rocky know when I'll return: I+VV.

Fortunately, the symbols are mostly made of straight lines, so my little craft project should be good enough for him to read.

Interestingly, my return time has six digits.

One more digit than Rocky's clock shows.

But I'm sure he'll figure it out.

If Rocky said "I'll be back at thirty-seven o'clock,"

I'd understand what he meant.

Before I hit the hay, I harvest a mini-camera from the lab's vacuum chamber.

It's just a small wireless camera that talks to a portable LCD clipped to the chamber.

I tape the camera up in the tunnel, pointed at the divider wall.

I bring the readout screen with me to my bunk.

There.

Now I have a baby-monitor setup in the tunnel.

There's no audio-the camera is for watching experiments, not chatting with people.

But it's better than nothing.

I tuck the bunk's sheets and blankets in tight all around the oval mattress pad.

I shimmy in between the tight bedding.

This way I won't just float around while I sleep.

My grand plans for communicating with Rocky will have to wait.

I'm a little frustrated, but not for long.

I conk out almost immediately.

T ap-tap-tap.

The sound barely penetrates my consciousness.

It's far away.

Tap-tap-tap.

I wake from a dreamless sleep.

"Huh?"

Tap-tap-tap.

"Breakfast,"

I mumble.

The mechanical arms reach into a compartment and pull out a packaged meal.

It's like Christmas every morning around here.

I pull the top off and steam wafts out in all directions.

There's a breakfast burrito inside.

"Nice,"

I say.

"Coffee?"

"Preparing..."

I take a bite of the breakfast burrito.

It's good.

All the food is good.

I guess they figured if we're going to die, we may as well eat good stuff.

"Coffee,"

says the computer.

A mechanical arm hands me a pouch with a pinch-straw in it.

Like a Capri Sun for adults.

Zero-g accommodations.

I let the burrito float nearby and take a sip of coffee.

It's delicious, of course.

It even has just the right amount of cream and sugar.

That's a very personal preference that varies wildly from person to person.

Tap-tap-tap.

What is that, anyway?

I check the LCD screen taped near my bunk.

Rocky is in the tunnel tapping on the divider wall.

"Computer!

How long was I asleep?"

"Patient was unconscious for ten hours and seventeen minutes."

"Oh crud!"

I wriggle out of my bedding and bounce up through the ship toward the control room.

I carry the burrito and coffee with me because I'm starving.

I bounce into the tunnel.

"Sorry!

Sorry!"

Rocky taps the divider louder than before now that I'm here.

He points to the Popsicle-stick numbers I taped to the divider and then to his clock.

He balls one of his hands into a fist.

"I'm sorry!"

I clasp my hands together as if praying.

I don't know what else to do.

There's no interplanetary symbol for supplication.

I don't know if he understands, but he unclenches his fist.

Maybe it was a mild admonishment.

I mean, he could have made five fists, but he only made one.

Anyway, I kept him waiting over two hours.

He's understandably upset.

Hopefully this next trick will make up for it.

I hold up a finger.

He returns the gesture.

I grab my duct-taped laptops and launch the waveform- analysis software on one and Excel on the other.

I press them against the tunnel wall and secure them there with tape.

I pull the Popsicle-stick numbers off the divider wall.

They're as good a place to start as any.

I hold up the "I"

and point to it.

"One,"

I say.

"One."

I point to my mouth, then back to the Eridian number.

"One."

Then I point to Rocky.

He points to the "I"

and says "."

I pause the waveform analyzer and scroll back a few seconds.

"There we go..."

Rocky's word for "one"

is just two notes played at the same time.

There are a bunch of harmonics and resonances in there, too, but the main frequency peaks are just two notes.

I type "one"

into the spreadsheet on the other computer and note the relevant frequencies.

"Okay..."

I return to the divider and hold up the "V"

symbol.

"Two,"

I say.

","

he says.

Another one-syllable word.

The oldest words in a language are usually the shortest.

This time, it's a chord made of four distinct notes.

I enter "two"

and record the frequencies for that word.

He starts to get excited.

I think he knows what I'm up to and it's got him happy.

I hold up the ""

and before I can even speak, he points to it and says, "."

Excellent.

Our first two-syllable word.

I have to scroll back and forth a bit in the waveform data to get the chords right.

The first syllable has just two notes and the second has five!

Rocky can make at least five different notes at the same time.

He must have multiple sets of vocal cords or something.

Well, he has five arms and five hands.

So why not five sets of vocal cords?

I don't see a mouth anywhere.

The notes are just coming from somewhere inside him.

When I first heard him speak, I thought it sounded like whale song.

That may have been more accurate than I thought.

Whales sound like they do because they move air back and forth across their vocal cords without expelling it.

Rocky may be doing the same thing.

Tap-tap-tap-tap!

"What?"

I look back at him.

He points to the ""

symbol still in my hand and then to me.

Then back to the ""

and back to me.

He's almost frantic about it.

"Oh, sorry,"

I say.

I hold the digit up properly and say, "Three."

He does jazz hands.

I throw some jazz hands back.

Huh.

While we're on the subject...

I stand still for a moment so he'll know there was a break in the conversation.

Then I do jazz hands and say, "Yes."

I repeat the gesture.

"Yes."

He does it back to me and says, "."

I note and record the frequencies in my laptop.

"Okay, we have 'yes' in our vocabulary now,"

I say.

Tap-tap-tap.

I look over.

Once he knows he has my attention, he does jazz hands again and says, "."

Same chord as before.

"Yes,"

I say.

"We covered this."

He holds up a finger for a moment.

Then he balls two of his fists and taps them together.

"."

...What?

"Ohhh,"

I say.

I'm a teacher.

What would I teach someone who just learned the word 'yes'?

"That's 'no.' "

At least I hope so.

I ball my fists and tap them together.

"No."

","

he says.

I check the laptop.

He just said yes.

Wait.

Does that mean it's not no?

Is that another yes?

Now I'm confused.

"No?"

I ask "No,"

he says in Eridian.

"So, 'yes'?"

"No, yes."

"Yes?"

"No.

No."

"Yes, yes?"

"No!"

He balls a fist at me, clearly frustrated.

Enough of this interspecies Abbott and Costello routine.

I hold up a finger.

He unballs his fist and returns the gesture.

I enter the frequencies for what I think is "no"

into my spreadsheet.

If I'm wrong, I'm wrong and we'll work it out later.

I hold up the "+"

symbol.

"Four."

He holds up three fingers on one hand, and one finger on another.

"."

I make note of the frequencies.

- For the next several hours, we expand our shared vocabulary to several thousand words.

Language is kind of an exponential system.

The more words you know, the easier it is to describe new ones.

Communication is hampered by my slow and clumsy system for listening to Rocky.

I check the frequencies he emits with one laptop, then look them up in my spreadsheet on the other laptop.

It's not a great system.

I've had enough.

I excuse myself for an hour to write some software.

I'm not a computer expert, but I know some rudimentary programming.

I write a program to take the audio-analysis software's output and look up the words in my table.

It's barely even a program- more of a script.

It's not efficient at all, but computers are fast.

Fortunately, Rocky speaks with musical chords.

While it's very difficult to make a computer turn human speech into text, it's very easy to make a computer identify musical notes and find them in a table.

From that point on, my laptop screen shows me the English translation of what Rocky is saying in real-time.

When a new word comes up, I enter it into my database and the computer knows it from then on.

Rocky, meanwhile, doesn't use any system to record what I'm saying or doing.

No computer, no writing implement, no microphone.

Nothing.

He just pays attention.

And as far as I can tell, he remembers everything I told him.

Every word.

Even if I only told it to him once several hours earlier.

If only my students were that attentive!

I suspect Eridians have much better memory than humans.

Broadly speaking, the human brain is a collection of software hacks compiled into a single, somehow-functional unit.

Each "feature"

was added as a random mutation that solved some specific problem to increase our odds of survival.

In short, the human brain is a mess.

Everything about evolution is messy.

So, I assume Eridians are also a mess of random mutations.

But whatever led to their brains being how they are, it gave them what we humans would call "photographic memory."

It's probably even more complicated than that.

Humans have a whole chunk of our brains dedicated to sight, and it even has its own memory cache.

Maybe Eridians are just really good at remembering sounds.

After all, it's their primary sense.

I know it's too early, but I can't wait any longer.

I get a vial of Astrophage from the lab supplies and bring it to the tunnel.

I hold it up.

"Astrophage,"

I say.

Rocky's entire posture changes.

He hunkers his carapace a little lower.

He tightens his claws a bit on the bars he uses to keep in place.

","

he says, his voice more quiet than usual.

I check the computer.

It's not a word I've recorded yet.

It must be his word for Astrophage.

I note it in the database.

I point to the vial.

"Astrophage on my star.

Bad."

"  ,"

Rocky says.

The computer translates: Astrophage on me star.

Bad bad bad.

Okay!

Theory confirmed.

He's here for the same reason I am.

I want to ask so many more questions.

But we just don't have the words.

It's infuriating!

"  ,"

Rocky says.

My computer pops up the text: You come from where, question?

Rocky has picked up the basic word ordering of English.

I think he realized early on that I can't automatically remember stuff, so he works with my system rather than trying to teach me his.

I probably seem pretty stupid, honestly.

But some of his own grammar sneaks in once in a while.

He always ends a question with the word "question."

"No understand,"

I say.

"You star is what name, question?"

"Oh!"

I say.

He wants the name of my star.

"Sol.

My star is called 'Sol.' "

"Understand.

Eridian name for you star is ."

I note down the new word.

That's Rocky's word for "Sol."

Unlike two humans fumbling to communicate, Rocky and I can't even pronounce each other's proper nouns.

"My name for your star is 'Eridani,' "

I say.

Technically we call it "40 Eridani,"

but I decide to keep it simple.

"Eridian name for my star is ."

I add the word to the dictionary.

"Understand."

"Good."

I don't have to read the computer screen for that particular translation.

I've started to recognize some of the more frequent words like "you,"

"me,"

"good,"

"bad,"

et cetera.

I've never been artistic and I'm about as far from having a musical ear as anyone can be.

But after you hear a chord a hundred times, you tend to remember it.

I check my watch-yes, I have a watch now.

The stopwatch has a clock feature.

It took me a while to notice.

I had other things on my mind.

We've been at it all day and I'm exhausted.

Do Eridians even know what sleep is?

I guess it's time to find out.

"Human bodies must sleep.

Sleep is this."

I curl up into a ball and close my eyes in an overdramatic representation of sleep.

I make a fake snoring sound because I'm a bad actor.

I return to normal and point to his clock.

"Humans sleep for twenty-nine thousand seconds."

Along with perfect memory, Eridians are extremely good at math.

At least, Rocky is.

As we worked our way through scientific units, it became immediately apparent that he can convert from his units to mine in the blink of an eye.

And he has no problem understanding base ten.

"Many seconds..."

he says.

"Why be still so many seconds, question...Understand!"

He relaxes his limbs and they go limp.

He curls up like a dead bug and remains motionless for a while.

"Eridians same!

!"

Oh thank God.

I can't imagine explaining "sleep"

to someone who had never heard of it.

Hey, I'm going to fall unconscious and hallucinate for a while.

By the way, I spend a third of my time doing this.

And if I can't do it for a while, I go insane and eventually die.

No need for concern.

I add his word for "sleep"

to the dictionary.

I turn to leave.

"I'm going to sleep now.

I'll come back in twenty-nine thousand seconds."

"I observe,"

he says.

"You observe?"

"I observe."

"Uh..."

He wants to watch me sleep?

In any other context that would be creepy, but when you're studying a new life-form it's appropriate, I guess.

"I will be still for twenty-nine thousand seconds,"

I warn him.

"Many seconds.

I will not do anything."

"I observe.

Wait."

He returns to his ship.

Is he finally going to get something to take notes with?

After a few minutes, he comes back with a device in one of his hands and a satchel held in two more.

"I observe."

I point to the device.

"What is that?"

"."

He pulls some kind of tool out of the satchel.

" not function."

He pokes the device with the tool a few times.

"I change.

 function."

I don't bother to note down the new word.

What would I enter it as?

"Thing Rocky was holding that one time"?

Whatever it is, it has a couple of wires sticking out and an opening that reveals some complex internals.

The object itself is irrelevant.

The point is he's repairing it.

New word for us.

"Fix."

I say.

"You fix."

","

he says.

I add "fix"

to the dictionary.

I suspect it'll come up a lot.

He wants to watch me sleep.

He knows it's not going to be exciting, but he wants to do it anyway.

So he brought some work with him to keep busy.

Okay.

Whatever floats his boat.

"Wait,"

I say.

I return to the ship and head to the dormitory.

I pull the mattress pad, sheets, and blanket from my bunk.

I could use one of the other two bunks but...they had my dead friends in them so I don't want to.

I bring the pad and sheets through the lab, awkwardly through the control room, and into the tunnel.

I use a copious amount of duct tape to affix the mattress pad to the wall, then cinch up the sheets and blanket.

"I sleep now,"

I say.

"Sleep."

I turn off the lights in the tunnel.

Total darkness for me, no effect for Rocky, who wants to watch me.

Best of both worlds.

I shimmy into bed and resist the urge to say good night.

It would just lead to more questions.

I drift off to the occasional clink and scrape of Rocky working on his device.

- The next several days are repetitive, but far from boring.

We greatly increase our shared vocabulary and a decent amount of grammar.

Tenses, plurals, conditionals...language is tricky.

But we're getting it piece by piece.

And slow though the process is, I'm memorizing more of his language.

I don't need the computer as often.

Though I still can't go without it completely-that'll take a long time.

I spend an hour every day studying Eridian vocabulary.

I made a little script to pick random words from my Excel spreadsheet and play the notes with a MIDI app.

Again, a rudimentary program, inefficiently written but computers are fast.

I want to be free of the spreadsheet as soon as I can.

For now, I still need it all the time.

But once in a while I'll understand an entire sentence without resorting to the computer.

Baby steps.

Every night, I sleep in the tunnel.

He watches.

I don't know why.

We haven't talked about it yet.

We've been too busy with other stuff.

But he really doesn't want me to sleep without him watching.

Even if I just want to catch a quick nap.

Today I want to work on an extremely important scientific unit that's been eluding us.

Mainly because we live in zero g.

"We need to talk about mass."

"Yes.

Kilogram."

"Right.

How do I tell you about a kilogram?"

I ask.

Rocky produces a small ball from his satchel.

It's about the size of a ping-pong ball.

"I know mass of this ball.

You measure.

You tell me how many kilograms ball is.

Then I know kilogram."

He thought it through!

"Yes!

Give me the ball."

He hangs on to several support poles with various hands and puts it in the mini-airlock.

After a few minutes of waiting for it to cool, I have it in my hands.

It's smooth and made of a metal.

Fairly dense, I think.

"How will I measure this?"

I mumble.

"Twenty-six,"

Rocky says out of nowhere.

"What about twenty-six?"

He points to the ball in my hand.

"Ball is twenty-six."

Oh, I get it.

The ball weighs twenty-six of something.

Whatever his unit is.

Okay.

All I have to do is work out the mass of this ball, divide by twenty-six, and tell him the answer.

"I understand.

The ball is a mass of twenty-six."

"No.

Is not."

I pause.

"It isn't?"

"Is not.

Ball is twenty-six."

"I don't understand."

He thinks for a moment, then says, "Wait."

He disappears into his ship.

While he's gone, I speculate on how to weigh something in zero g.

It still has mass, of course.

But I can't just put it on a scale.

There's no gravity.

And I can't spin up the Hail Mary's centrifugal gravity.

The tunnel is connected to her nose.

I could make a small centrifuge.

Something big enough for the smallest lab scale I have.

Rotate at some constant rate with the scale inside.

Measure something I know the mass of and then measure the ball.

I could calculate the mass of the ball from the ratio of the two measurements.

But I'd have to build a consistent centrifuge.

How would I do that?

I can spin something in the zero-g environment of the lab easily enough, but how do I spin it at a constant rate across multiple experiments?

Oooh!

I don't need a constant rate!

I just need a string with a mark in the center!

I fly into the Hail Mary.

Rocky will forgive me for running off.

Heck, he can probably "observe"

me from wherever he is on his ship anyway.

I bring the ball down to the lab.

I get a piece of nylon string and tie each end around a plastic sample canister.

I now have a string with little buckets at each end.

I put the canisters next to each other and pull the now-folded string taut.

I use a pen to mark the farthest point.

That's the exact center of this contraption.

I wave the ball back and forth with my hand to get a feel for its mass.

Probably less than a pound.

Less than half a kilogram.

I leave everything floating in the lab and kick my way down to the dormitory.

"Water,"

I say.

"Water requested,"

says the computer.

The metal arms hand me a zero-g "sipper"

of water.

Just a plastic pouch with a straw on it that only lets water through if you unlatch a little clip.

And inside is 1 liter of water.

The arms always give me water a liter at a time.

You have to stay hydrated if you want to save the world.

I return to the lab.

I squirt about half of the water into a sample box and seal it.

I put the half-depleted sipper into one of the buckets and the metal ball into the other.

I set the whole thing spinning in the air.

The two masses clearly aren't equal.

The lopsided rotation of the two connected containers shows the water side is much heavier.

Good.

That's what I wanted.

I pluck it out of the air and take a sip of water.

I start it spinning again.

Still off-center but not as bad.

I take more sips, do more spins, take more sips, and so on until my little device rotates perfectly around the marked center point.

That means the mass of the water is equal to the mass of the ball.

I pull out the sippy.

I know the density of water-it's 1 kilogram per liter.

So all I need to know is the volume of this water to know its mass and therefore the mass of the metal ball.

I get a large plastic syringe from the supplies.

It can pull a maximum of 100 cc of volume.

I attach the syringe to the sippy and unclip the straw.

I draw out 100 cc of water, then squirt it into my "wastewater box."

I repeat this a few more times.

The last syringe is only about a quarter full when I empty the bag.

Result: 325 ccs of water, which weighs 325 grams!

Therefore Rocky's ball also weighs 325 grams.

I return to the tunnel to tell Rocky all about how smart I am.

He balls a fist at me as I enter.

"You left!

Bad!"

"I measured the mass!

I made a very smart experiment."

He holds up a string with beads on it.

"Twenty-six."

The beaded string is just like the ones he sent me back when we talked about our atmospheres- "Oh,"

I say.

It's an atom.

That's how he talks about atoms.

I count the beads.

There are twenty-six in all.

He's talking about element 26-one of the most common elements on Earth.

"Iron,"

I say.

I point at the necklace.

"Iron."

He points at the necklace and says, "."

I record the word in my dictionary.

"Iron,"

he says again, pointing at the necklace.

"Iron."

He points to the ball in my hand.

"Iron."

It takes a second to sink in.

Then I slap my forehead.

"You are bad."

It was a fun experiment, but a total waste of time.

Rocky was giving me all the information I needed.

Or trying to, at least.

I know how dense iron is, and I know how to calculate the volume of a sphere.

Getting to mass from there is just a little arithmetic.

I pull a pair of calipers out of the toolkit I keep in the tunnel and measure the sphere's diameter.

It's 4.3 centimeters.

From that I work out the volume, multiply by the density of iron, and get a much more precise and accurate mass of 328.25 grams.

"I was only off by one percent,"

I grumble.

"You talk to you, question?"

"Yes!

I'm talking to me."

"Humans are unusual."

"Yes,"

I say.

Rocky stretches his legs.

"I sleep now."

"Wow,"

I say.

This is the first time he's had to sleep since we met.

Good.

This will provide me some time for some lab work.

But how much time?

"How long do Eridians sleep?"

"I not know."

"You don't know?

You're Eridian.

How can you not know how long Eridians sleep?"

"Eridians not know how long sleep last.

Maybe short time.

Maybe long time."

They sleep unpredictable amounts of time.

I guess there's no rule saying sleep has to evolve as a regular pattern.

Does he at least know a range of times it might be?

"Is there a minimum time?

A maximum time?"

"Minimum is 12,265 seconds.

Maximum is 42,928 seconds."

I often get strangely specific numbers from Rocky on things that should be rough estimates.

It took me a while to figure out, but I finally did.

He actually is coming up with rough, round numbers.

But they're in his units and in base six.

It's actually easier for him to convert those values to base-ten Earth seconds than it is for him to think directly in Earth seconds.

If I converted those values back to Eridian seconds and looked at the numbers in base six, I bet they'd be some round number.

But I'm too lazy.

Why un-convert data he already converted?

I've never seen him be wrong on arithmetic.

Meanwhile, I have to divide by 60 twice on a calculator just to convert from one of my own planet's units to another of my own planet's units.

He'll sleep for a minimum of three and a half hours and a maximum of almost twelve hours.

"I understand,"

I say.

I head back toward the airlock.

"You observe, question?"

Rocky asks.

He watched me sleep, so it's only fair he offer to let me watch him.

I'm sure Earth scientists would jump all over the place to learn anything about what an Eridian sleeping looks like.

But I finally have time to do some deep analysis of xenonite and I'm just dying to know how xenon bonds with other elements.

If I can get any of my lab equipment to work in zero g, that is.

"Not necessary."

"You observe, question?"

he asks again.

"No."

"Observe."

"You want me to observe you sleep?"

"Yes.

Want want want."

Through unspoken agreement, a tripled word means extreme emphasis.

"Why?"

"I sleep better if you observe."

"Why?"

He waves a few arms, trying to find a way to phrase it.

"Eridians do that."

Eridians watch one another sleep.

It's a thing.

I should be more culturally sensitive, but he threw shade when I talked to myself.

"Eridians are unusual."

"Observe.

I sleep better."

I don't want to watch a dog-sized spider not move for several hours.

There's a crew in there, right?

Have one of them do it.

I point to his ship.

"Have some other Eridian observe you."

"No."

"Why not?"

"I am only Eridian here."

My mouth hangs open.

"You're the only person on that huge ship?!"

He's quiet for a moment, then says, "           ."

Complete nonsense.

Did my kludged-together translation software fail?

I check it out.

No, it's working fine.

I examine the waveforms.

They seem similar to the ones I'd seen before.

But they're lower.

Come to think of it, that whole sentence seemed lower in pitch than anything Rocky has ever said before.

I select the whole segment in the software's recording history and bump it up an octave.

The octave is a universal thing, not specific to humans.

It means doubling the frequency of every note.

The computer immediately translates the result.

"Original crew was twenty-three.

Now is only me."

That octave-drop...I think it's emotion.

"They...did they die?"

"Yes."

I rub my eyes.

Wow.

The Blip-A had a crew of twenty-three.

Rocky is the sole survivor and he's understandably upset about it.

"Wh...er..."

I stammer.

"Bad."

"Bad bad bad."

I sigh.

"My original crew was three.

Now it's just me."

I put my hand up against the divider.

Rocky puts a claw on the divider opposite my hand.

"Bad."

"Bad bad bad,"

I say.

We stay like that for a moment.

"I'll watch you sleep."

"Good.

Me sleep,"

he says.

His arms relax and he looks for all the world like a dead bug.

He floats free in his side of the tunnel, no longer hanging on to any support bars.

"Well, you're not alone anymore, buddy,"

I say.

"Neither of us are."

"M r.

Easton, I don't think we need to be searched,"

said Stratt.

"I think you do,"

said the head prison guard.

His thick New Zealand accent sounded friendly, but there was an edge to it.

This man had made a whole career out of not putting up with people's crap.

"We're exempt from all-"

"Stop,"

Easton said.

"No one gets in or out of Pare without a full search."

Auckland Prison, which the locals called "Pare"

for some reason, was New Zealand's only maximum-security prison unit.

The sole point of entry was awash with security cameras and a micro-scanner for all guests.

Even the guards passed through the detector on their way in.

Easton's assistant and I stood off to the side while our bosses had their dispute.

He and I looked at each other and mutually shrugged.

A small fraternity of underlings with stubborn bosses.

"I'm not turning over my Taser.

I can call your prime minister if you like,"

Stratt said.

"Sure,"

said Easton.

"She'll tell you the same thing I'm about to tell you now: We don't let weapons anywhere near those animals in there.

Even my own guards only have batons.

There are some rules we don't change.

I'm fully aware of your authority, but it has limits.

You're not magical."

"Mr.

E-"

"Torch!"

Easton said, holding out his hand.

His assistant handed over a small flashlight.

He clicked it on.

"Please open your mouth wide, Ms.

Stratt.

I need to check for contraband."

Whoa boy.

I stepped forward before this got any worse.

"I'll go first!"

I opened my mouth wide.

Easton shined the light into my mouth and looked this way and that.

"You're clear."

Stratt just glared at him.

He held the flashlight at the ready.

"I can get a female guard in here and order a much more thorough search if you like."

For a few seconds, she did nothing.

Then she pulled her Taser from its holster and handed it over.

She must have been tired.

I'd never seen her give up on a power trip before.

Though, I also hadn't seen her get into a useless peeing contest before either.

She had a lot of authority and wasn't afraid to flex when needed, but she usually wasn't one to argue when a simple solution was present.

Soon, guards escorted Stratt and me through the cold, gray walls of the prison.

"What the heck is wrong with you?"

I said.

"I don't like little dictators in their little kingdoms,"

she said.

"Drives me crazy."

"You can bend a little once in a while."

"I'm out of patience and the world is out of time."

I held up a finger.

"No, no, no!

You can't just use 'I'm saving the world' as an excuse every time you're a jerk."

She thought it over.

"Yeah, okay.

You may have a point."

We followed the guards down a long corridor to the Maximum Security Unit.

"Maximum security seems like overkill,"

she said.

"Seven people died,"

I reminded her.

"Because of him."

"It was accidental."

"It was criminal negligence.

He deserves what he got."

The guards led us around a corner.

We followed along.

The whole place was a maze.

"Why bring me here at all?"

"Science."

"As always."

I sighed.

"Can't say I like this."

"Noted."

We entered a stark room containing a single metal table.

On one side sat a prisoner in a bright-orange jumpsuit.

A balding man in his late forties, maybe early fifties.

He was handcuffed to the table.

He didn't look anything like a threat.

Stratt and I sat down opposite him.

The guards closed the door behind us.

The man looked at us.

He tilted his head slightly, waiting for someone to speak.

"Dr.

Robert Redell,"

Stratt said.

"Call me Bob,"

he said.

"I'll call you Dr.

Redell."

She pulled a file out of her briefcase and looked it over.

"You're currently serving a life sentence for seven counts of culpable homicide."

"That's their excuse for me being here, yes,"

he said.

I piped up.

"Seven people died on your rig.

Because of your negligence.

Seems like a pretty good 'excuse' for you to be here."

He shook his head.

"Seven people died because the control room didn't follow procedure and activated a primary pumping station while workers were still in the reflector tower.

It was a horrible accident, but it was an accident."

"Enlighten us, then,"

I said.

"If the deaths at your solar farm weren't your fault, why are you here?"

"Because the government thinks I embezzled millions of dollars."

"And why do they think that?"

I asked.

"Because I embezzled millions of dollars."

He adjusted his shackled wrists into a more comfortable position.

"But that had nothing to do with the deaths.

Nothing!"

"Tell me about your blackpanel power idea,"

Stratt said.

"Blackpanel?"

He drew back.

"It was just an idea.

I emailed that anonymously."

Stratt rolled her eyes.

"Do you really think email sent from a prison computer lab is anonymous?"

He looked away.

"I'm not a computer guy.

I'm an engineer."

"I want to hear more about blackpanel,"

she said.

"And if I like what I hear, it could reduce your jail time.

So start talking."

He perked up.

"Well...I mean...okay.

What do you know about solar thermal power?"

Stratt looked at me.

"Uh,"

I said.

"It's when you have a whole bunch of mirrors set up to reflect sunlight to the top of a tower.

If you get a few hundred square meters of mirror focusing all that sunlight onto a single point, you can heat up water, make it boil, and run a turbine."

I turned to Stratt.

"But that's not new.

Heck, there's a fully functional solar thermal power plant in Spain right now.

If you want to know about it, talk to them."

She silenced me with a hand motion.

"And that's what you were making for New Zealand?"

"Well,"

he said.

"It was funded by New Zealand.

But the idea was to provide power for Africa."

"Why would New Zealand pay a bunch of money to help Africa?"

I asked.

"Because we're nice,"

Redell said.

"Wow,"

I said.

"I know New Zealand is pretty cool but-"

"And it was going to be a New Zealandowned company that charged for the power,"

Redell said.

"There it is."

He leaned forward.

"Africa needs infrastructure.

To do that, they need power.

And they have nine million square kilometers of useless land that gets some of the most intense continuous sunlight on Earth.

The Sahara Desert is just sitting there, waiting to give them everything they need.

All we needed to do was build the damn power plants!"

He flopped back in his chair.

"But every local government wanted a piece of the pie.

Graft, bribes, payoffs, you name it.

You think I embezzled a lot?

Shit, that's nothing compared to what I had to pay in bribes just to build a solar plant in the middle of fucking nowhere."

"And then?"

Stratt said.

He looked at his shoes.

"We built a pilot plant-one square kilometer of mirror area.

All of it focused on a large metal drum full of water on top of a tower.

Boil the water, run a turbine, you know the drill.

I had a crew checking the drum for leaks.

When anyone's in the tower, the mirrors are supposed to be angled away.

But someone in the control room fired up the whole system when they thought they were starting a virtual test."

He sighed.

"Seven people.

All dead in an instant.

At least they didn't suffer.

Much.

Someone had to pay.

The victims were all New Zealanders, and so am I.

So the government came after me.

It was a farce of a trial."

"And the embezzlement?"

I said.

He nodded.

"Yeah, that came up in the trial too.

But I would have gotten away with it if the project had been successful.

I'm not to blame here.

I mean, yeah, stealing money, okay, I'm guilty of that.

But I didn't kill those people.

Not through negligence or any other means."

"Where were you when the accident happened?"

Stratt said.

He paused.

"Where were you?"

she repeated.

"I was in Monaco.

On a vacation."

"You'd been there for three months on that vacation.

Gambling away your embezzled money."

"I...have a gambling problem,"

he said.

"I admit that.

I mean, it was gambling debt that made me embezzle in the first place.

It's a sickness."

"And what if you had been doing your job instead of going on a bender for three months?

What if you'd been there the day the accident happened?

Would the accident still have happened?"

His expression was answer enough.

"Okay,"

Stratt said.

"Now we're past the excuses and bullshit.

You're not going to convince me you're an innocent scapegoat.

And now you know that.

So let's move on: Tell me about blackpanels."

"Yeah, okay."

He composed himself.

"I've spent my whole life in the energy sector, so obviously Astrophage is really interesting to me.

A storage medium like that-man, if it weren't for what it's doing to the sun, it would be the greatest stroke of luck for humanity in history."

He shifted in his seat.

"Nuclear reactors, coal plants, solar thermal plants...in the end they all do the same thing: Use heat to boil water, use the steam to drive a turbine.

But with Astrophage, we don't need any of that crap.

It turns heat directly into stored energy.

And it doesn't even need a big heat differential.

Just anything above 96.415 degrees."

"We know that,"

I said.

"I've been using a nuclear reactor's heat to breed up Astrophage for the last several months."

"What'd you get?

Maybe a few grams?

My idea can get you a thousand kilograms per day.

In a few years you'll have enough for the whole Hail Mary mission.

It'll take you longer than that to build the ship anyway."

"All right, you have my attention,"

I said.

Of course, Stratt hadn't told me anything about whatever "blackpanel"

was.

"Get a square of metal foil.

Pretty much any metal will do.

Anodize it until it's black.

Don't paint it-anodize it.

Put clear glass over it and leave a one-centimeter gap between the glass and the foil.

Seal the edges with brick, foam, or some other good insulator.

Then set it out in the sun."

"Okay, what good will that do?"

"The black foil will absorb sunlight and get hot.

The glass will insulate it from outside air-any heat loss has to pass through the glass, and that's slow.

It'll reach an equilibrium temperature well over one hundred degrees Celsius."

I nod.

"And at that temperature you can enrich Astrophage."

"Yes."

"But it would be ridiculously slow,"

I said.

"If you had a one- square-meter box and ideal weather conditions...say, one thousand watts per square meter of solar energy..."

"It's about half a microgram per day,"

he said.

"Give or take."

"That's a far cry from 'a thousand kilograms' per day."

He smiled.

"It's just a matter of how many square meters you make of it."

"You'd need two trillion square meters to get a thousand kilograms per day."

"The Sahara Desert is nine trillion square meters."

My jaw dropped open.

"That went by fast,"

said Stratt.

"Explain."

"Well,"

I said.

"He wants to pave a chunk of the Sahara Desert with blackpanels.

Like...a quarter of the entire Sahara Desert!"

"It'd be the biggest thing ever made by humanity,"

he said.

"It'd be starkly visible from space."

I glared at him.

"And it would destroy the ecology of Africa and probably Europe."

"Not as much as the coming ice age will."

Stratt held up her hand.

"Dr.

Grace.

Would it work?"

I fidgeted.

"Well, I mean...it's a sound concept.

But I don't know if it's even possible to implement.

This isn't like making a building or a road.

We're talking about literally trillions of these things."

Redell leaned in.

"That's why I designed the blackpanels to be made entirely out of foil, glass, and ceramics.

All materials we have plenty of here on Earth."

"Wait,"

I said.

"How do the Astrophage breed in this scenario?

Your blackpanels will enrich them, sure, and they'll be breed-ready.

But there are a bunch of steps they need to go through when they breed."

"Oh, I know."

He smirked.

"We'll have a static magnet in there to give them a magnetic field to follow-they need that to kick off their migration response.

Then we'll have a small IR filter on one part of the glass.

It'll only let the CO2 IR spectral signature wavelengths through.

The Astrophage will go there to breed.

Then, after dividing, they'll head toward the glass because that's the direction of the sun.

We'll have a small pinhole somewhere in the side of the panel for air exchange with the outside.

It'll be slow enough that it doesn't cool down the panel, but fast enough to replenish the CO2 used by Astrophage while breeding."

I opened my mouth to protest, but I couldn't find anything wrong with it.

He'd thought it all through.

"Well?"

said Stratt.

"As a breeder system it's horrible,"

I said.

"Way less efficient and far lower yield than my system on the carrier's reactor.

But he didn't design it for efficiency.

He designed it for scalability."

"That's right,"

he said.

He pointed to Stratt.

"I hear you have godlike authority over pretty much the whole world right now."

"That's an exaggeration,"

she said.

"Not much of one, though,"

I said.

Redell continued.

"Can you get China to orient their industrial base around making blackpanels?

Not just them but pretty much every industrial nation on Earth?

That's what it would take."

She pursed her lips.

After a moment, she said, "Yes."

"And can you tell the goddamned corrupt government officials in North Africa to stay out of the way?"

"That part will be easy,"

she said.

"When this is all over, those governments will keep the blackpanels.

They'll be the industrial-energy powerhouse of the world."

"See, there we go,"

he said.

"Save the world and permanently lift Africa out of poverty while we're at it.

Of course, this is all just a theory.

I have to develop the blackpanel and make sure we can mass-produce it.

I'd need to be in a lab instead of prison."

Stratt mulled it over.

Then she stood.

"Okay.

You're with us."

He pumped his fist.

- I wake up in my bed, which is mounted to the tunnel wall.

That first night was a kludge with duct tape.

Since then, I learned that epoxy glue works well on xenonite, so I was able to attach a couple of anchor points and mount the mattress properly.

I sleep in the tunnel every night now.

Rocky insists.

And, once every eighty-six hours or so, Rocky sleeps in the tunnel and wants me to watch.

Well, he's only slept three times so far, so my data on his waking period is a bit sparse.

But he's been kind of consistent on it.

I stretch out my arms and yawn.

"Good Morning,"

Rocky says.

It's pitch-dark.

I turn on the lamp mounted next to the bed.

Rocky has an entire workshop set up on his side of the tunnel.

He's always making modifications or repairs to something or other.

Seems like his ship is constantly in need of repair.

Right this moment he holds an oblong metal device with two of his hands and uses another two to poke at the innards with needle- like tools.

The remaining hand grasps a handle on the wall.

"Mornin',"

I say.

"I'm going to eat.

I'll be back."

Rocky waves absently.

"Eat."

I float down to the dormitory for my morning ritual.

I eat a prepackaged breakfast (scrambled eggs with pork sausage) and a bag of hot coffee.

It's been a few days since I last cleaned up, and I can smell my own body odor.

Not a good sign.

So I sponge off at the sponge-bath station and get a clean jumpsuit.

All this technology and I haven't seen any means of cleaning clothing.

So I've taken to soaking it in water and putting it in the lab freezer for a while.

Kills off all the germs, and those are what cause the smell.

Fresh, not-clean clothes.

I pull the jumpsuit on.

I've decided today is the day.

After a week of honing our language skills, Rocky and I are ready to start having real conversations.

I can even understand him without having to look at the translation about a third of the time now.

I float back to the tunnel, sipping the last of my coffee.

Okay.

Finally I think we have the words needed for this discussion.

Here goes.

I clear my throat.

"Rocky.

I am here because Astrophage makes Sol sick but doesn't make Tau Ceti sick.

Are you here for the same reason?"

Rocky puts the device and his tools on his bandoleer and climbs along the support rails to the divider.

Good.

He understands this is a serious conversation.

"Yes.

No understand why Tau not sick but Eridani is sick.

If Astrophage no leave Eridani, my people die."

"Same!"

I say.

"Same same same!

If Astrophage continues to infect Sol, all the humans will die."

"Good.

Same.

You and me will save Eridani and Sol."

"Yes yes yes!"

"Why did other humans on you ship die, question?"

Rocky asks.

Oh.

So we're going to talk about that?

I rub the back of my head.

"We, uh...we slept all the way here.

Not a normal sleep.

A special sleep.

A dangerous sleep, but necessary.

My crewmates died, but I didn't.

Random luck."

"Bad,"

he says.

"Bad.

Why did the other Eridians die?"

"I not know.

Everyone get sick.

Then everyone die."

His voice quavers.

"I not sick.

I not know why."

"Bad,"

I say with a sigh.

"What kind of sick?"

He thinks for a moment.

"I need word.

Small life.

Single thing.

Like Astrophage.

Eridian body made of many many of these."

"Cell,"

I say.

"My body is many many cells also."

He says the Eridian word for "cell,"

and I add the tones to my ever-growing dictionary.

"Cell,"

he says.

"My crew have problem with cells.

Many many cells die.

Not infection.

Not injury.

No reason.

But not me.

Never me.

Why, question?

I not know."

Each individual cell in the affected Eridians died?

That sounds horrible.

It also sounds like radiation sickness.

How am I going to describe that?

I shouldn't have to.

If they're a spacefaring people, they should already understand radiation.

We don't have a word for it between us yet, though.

Let's work on that.

"I need a word: fast-moving hydrogen atoms.

Very very fast."

"Hot gas."

"No.

Faster than that.

Very very very fast."

He wiggles his carapace.

He's confused.

I try another approach.

"Space has very very very fast hydrogen atoms.

They move almost the speed of light.

They were created by stars long long long ago."

"No.

No mass in space.

Space is empty."

Oh boy.

"No, that's wrong.

There are hydrogen atoms in space.

Very very fast hydrogen atoms."

"Understand."

"You didn't know that?"

"No."

I stare in shock.

How can a civilization develop space travel without ever discovering radiation?

- "Dr.

Grace,"

she said.

"Dr.

Lokken,"

I said.

We sat across from each other at a small steel table.

It was a tiny room, but spacious by aircraft-carrier standards.

I didn't quite understand its original purpose and its name was written in Chinese characters.

But I think it was a place for the navigator to look at charts...?

"Thank you for making time to see me,"

she said.

"Not a problem."

As a rule, we tried to avoid each other.

Our relationship had matured from "annoyed with each other"

to "very annoyed with each other."

I was as much a part of the problem as she was.

But we got off on the wrong foot all those months ago back in Geneva and never really improved.

"Of course, I don't think this is necessary."

"Neither do I,"

I said.

"But Stratt insisted you run this stuff by me.

So here we are."

"I have an idea.

But I want your opinion."

She pulled out a file and handed it to me.

"CERN is going to release this paper next week.

This is a rough draft.

But I know everyone there, so they let me see an advance copy."

I opened the folder.

"Okay, what's it about?"

"They figured out how Astrophage stores energy."

"Really?!"

I gasped.

Then I cleared my throat.

"Really?"

"Yes, and frankly it's amazing."

She pointed to a graph on the first page.

"Long story short: It's neutrinos."

"Neutrinos?"

I shook my head.

"How the heck..."

"I know.

It's very counterintuitive.

But there's a large neutrino burst every time they kill an Astrophage.

They even took samples to the IceCube Neutrino Observatory and punctured them in the main detector pool.

They got a massive number of hits.

Astrophage can only contain neutrinos if it's alive, and there's a lot of them in there."

"How does it make neutrinos?"

She flipped a few pages in the paper and pointed to another chart.

"This is more your area than mine, but microbiologists have confirmed Astrophage has a lot of free hydrogen ions- raw protons with no electron-zipping around just inside the cell membrane."

"Yeah, I remember reading about that.

It was a group in Russia that found that out."

She nodded.

"CERN is pretty sure that, through a mechanism we don't understand, when those protons collide at a high enough velocity, their kinetic energy is converted into two neutrinos with opposite momentum vectors."

I leaned back, confused.

"That is really odd.

Mass usually doesn't just 'happen' like that."

She wiggled her hand.

"Not quite true.

Sometimes gamma rays, when they pass close to an atomic nucleus, will spontaneously become an electron and a positron.

It's called 'pair production.' So it's not unheard-of.

But we've never seen neutrinos created that way."

"That's kind of neat.

I never got too deep into atomic physics.

I've never heard of pair production before."

"It's a thing."

"Okay."

"Anyway,"

she said, "there's a lot of complicated stuff about neutrinos I won't get into-there are different kinds and they can even change what kind they are.

But the upshot is this: They're an extremely small particle.

Their mass is something like one twenty-billionth the mass of a proton."

"Waaaaaait,"

I said.

"We know Astrophage is always 96.415 degrees Celsius.

Temperature is just the velocity of particles inside.

So we should be able to calcu-"

"Calculate the velocity of the particles inside,"

she said.

"Yes.

We know the average velocity of the protons.

And we know their mass, which means we know their kinetic energy.

I know where you're going with this and the answer is yes.

It balances."

"Wow!"

I put my hand on my forehead.

"That's amazing!"

"Yes.

It is."

That was the answer to the long-asked question: Why is Astrophage's critical temperature what it is?

Why not hotter?

Why not colder?

Astrophage makes neutrinos in pairs by slamming protons together.

For the reaction to work, the protons need to collide with a higher kinetic energy than the mass energy of two neutrinos.

If you work backward from the mass of a neutrino, you know the velocity those protons have to collide at.

And when you know the velocity of particles in an object, you know its temperature.

To have enough kinetic energy to make neutrinos, the protons have to be 96.415 degrees Celsius.

"Oh man,"

I said.

"So any heat energy above the critical temperature will just make the protons collide harder."

"Yes.

They'll make neutrinos and have leftover energy.

Then they bump into other protons, et cetera.

Any heat energy above the critical temperature gets quickly converted into neutrinos.

But if it drops below critical temperature, the protons are going too slow and neutrino production stops.

End result: You can't get it hotter than 96.415 degrees.

Not for long, anyway.

And if it gets too cold, the Astrophage uses stored energy to heat back up to that temperature-just like any other warm-blooded life- form."

She gave me a moment to let that all sink in.

CERN really came through.

But a couple of things still bothered me.

"Okay, so it makes neutrinos,"

I said.

"How does it turn them back into energy?"

"That's the easy part,"

she said.

"Neutrinos are what's called Majorana particles.

It means the neutrino is its own antiparticle.

Basically, every time two neutrinos collide, it's a matter- antimatter interaction.

They annihilate and become photons.

Two photons, actually, with the same wavelength and going opposite directions.

And since the wavelength of a photon is based on the energy in the photon..."

"The Petrova wavelength!"

I yelped.

She nodded.

"Yes.

The mass energy of a neutrino is exactly the same as the energy found in one photon of Petrova- wavelength light.

This paper is truly groundbreaking."

I rested my chin on my hands.

"Wow...just wow.

I guess the only remaining question is how does an Astrophage keep neutrinos inside?"

"We don't know.

Neutrinos routinely pass through the entire planet Earth without hitting a single atom-they're just that small.

Well, it's more about quantum wavelengths and probabilities of collision.

But suffice it to say, neutrinos are famously hard to interact with.

But for some reason, Astrophage has what we call 'super cross-sectionality.' That's just a fancy term meaning nothing can quantum-tunnel through it.

It goes against every law of particle physics we thought we knew, but it's been proven over and over."

"Yeah."

I tapped my finger on the table.

"It absorbs all wavelengths of light-even wavelengths that should be too large to interact with it."

"Yes,"

she said.

"Turns out it also collides with all matter that tries to get by, no matter how unlikely that collision should be.

Anyway, as long as an Astrophage is alive, it exhibits this super cross-sectionality.

And that brings us nicely to what I wanted to talk to you about."

"Oh?"

I said.

"There's more?"

"Yes."

She pulled a diagram of the Hail Mary hull out of her bag.

"This is what I need you for: I'm working on radiation protection for the Hail Mary."

I perked up.

"Of course!

Astrophage will block it all!"

"Maybe,"

she said.

"But I need to know how space radiation works to be sure.

I know the broad strokes, but not the details.

Please enlighten me."

I folded my arms.

"Well, there's two kinds, really.

High- energy particles emitted by the sun, and GCRs that are just kind of everywhere."

"Start with the solar particles,"

she said.

"Sure.

Solar particles are just hydrogen atoms emitted by the sun.

Sometimes a magnetic storm on the sun can cause it to spit out a whole bunch of them.

Other times it's relatively quiet.

And lately, the Astrophage infection has been robbing so much energy from the sun that magnetic storms are less common."

"Horrifying,"

she said.

"I know.

Did you hear that global warming has been almost undone?"

She nodded.

"Humanity's recklessness with our environment accidentally bought us an extra month of time by pre-heating the planet."

"We fell in poop and came out smelling like roses,"

I said.

She laughed.

"I have not heard that one.

We don't have that expression in Norwegian."

"You do now."

I smiled.

She looked down at the hull plan-a little faster than I think was necessary, but whatever.

"How fast do these solar particles travel?"

she asked.

"About four hundred kilometers per second."

"Good.

We can ignore them."

She scribbled a note to herself on the paper.

"The Hail Mary will be going away faster than that within eight hours.

They won't be able to catch up, let alone do any damage."

I whistled.

"It's really amazing what we're doing.

I mean...

jeez.

Astrophage would be the best thing ever if it weren't, you know, destroying the sun."

"I know,"

she said.

"Now, tell me about GCRs."

"Those are trickier,"

I said.

"It stands for-"

"Galactic cosmic rays,"

she said.

"And they're not cosmic rays, right?"

"Right.

They're just hydrogen ions-protons.

But they're going a lot faster.

They're going near the speed of light."

"Why are they called cosmic rays if they're not even electromagnetic emissions?"

"People used to think they were.

The name stuck."

"Do they come from some common source?"

"No, they're omnidirectional.

They're made by supernovas, which have happened all over the place.

We're just kind of constantly awash with GCRs in all directions.

And they're a huge problem for space travel.

But not anymore!"

I leaned forward to look at her schematic again.

It was a cross-section of a hull.

There was a 1-millimeter void between two walls.

"Are you going to fill that area with Astrophage?"

"That's the plan."

I pondered the schematic.

"You want to fill the hull with fuel?

Isn't that dangerous?"

"Only if we let it see CO2-band light.

If it doesn't see CO2, it won't do anything.

And it'll be in the dark between the hulls.

Dimitri plans to make a fuel slurry out of Astrophage and low- viscosity oil to make it easier to transport to the engines.

I want to line the hull with that stuff."

I pinched my chin.

"It could work.

But Astrophage can die from physical trauma.

You can kill one by poking it with a sharp nanostick."

"Yes, that's why I asked CERN to do some off-the-books experiments for me as a favor."

"Wow.

CERN will just do whatever you want?

Are you, like, mini-Stratt or something?"

She chuckled.

"Old friends and contacts.

Anyway, they found that even particles moving near light speed can't get past Astrophage.

And none of them seem to kill it either."

"That actually makes a lot of sense,"

I said.

"It evolved to live on the surface of stars.

They must get bombarded by energy and very fast-moving particles all the time."

She pointed to a zoomed-in schematic of Astrophage canals.

"The entire radiation load will be halted.

All we need is a layer of Astrophage slurry thick enough to guarantee there's always an Astrophage cell in the way of any incoming particles.

One millimeter should be more than enough.

Plus, we don't waste any mass.

We'll be using the fuel itself as insulation.

And if the crew need that last little bit of Astrophage, well, consider it a reserve."

"Hmm...a 'reserve' that could power New York City for twenty thousand years."

She looked at the diagram, then back to me.

"You did all that math in your head?"

"Eh, I had some shortcuts.

We're dealing with such absurd scales of energy here, I tend to think in 'New York City years' of energy, which is about one-half of one gram of Astrophage."

She rubbed her temples.

"And we need to make two million kilograms of it.

If we make a mistake along the way..."

"We'll save Astrophage the trouble of destroying humanity by doing it ourselves,"

I say.

"Yeah.

I think about that a lot."

"So, what do you think?"

she said.

"Is this a terrible idea, or could it work?"

"I think it's genius."

She smiled and looked away.

A nother day, another staff meeting.

Who would have thought saving the world could be so boring?

The science team sat around the meeting-room table.

Me, Dimitri, and Lokken.

For all her talk about cutting out bureaucracy, Stratt ended up with a bunch of de facto department heads and daily staff meetings.

Sometimes, the stuff we all hate ends up being the only way to do things.

Stratt sat at the head of the table, of course.

And next to her was a man I'd never seen before.

"Everyone,"

Stratt said.

"I want you to meet Dr.

Franois Leclerc."

The Frenchman to her left waved halfheartedly.

"Hello."

"Leclerc is a world-renowned climatologist from Paris.

I've put him in charge of tracking, understanding, and-if possible -ameliorating the climate effects of Astrophage."

"Oh, is that all?"

I said.

Leclerc smiled, but it faded quickly.

"So, Dr.

Leclerc,"

Stratt said.

"We've been getting a lot of conflicting reports on exactly what to expect from the reduction of solar energy.

It's hard to find any two climatologists who agree."

He shrugged.

"It's hard to find two climatologists who agree on the color of an orange.

It is, unfortunately, an inexact field.

There is a lot of uncertainty and-if I'm being honest-a lot of guesswork.

Climate science is in its infancy."

"You're not giving yourself enough credit.

Out of all the experts, you're the only one I could find whose climate- prediction models were proven true over and over again for the last twenty years."

He nodded.

She gestured to a disorderly mass of papers on the meeting table.

"I've been sent every kind of prediction from minor crop failures to global biosphere collapse.

I want to hear what you have to say.

You've seen the predicted solar-output numbers.

What's your take?"

"Disaster, of course,"

he said.

"We're looking at extinction of many species, complete upheaval of biomes all over the world, major changes in weather patterns-"

"Humans,"

Stratt said.

"I want to know how this affects humans, and when.

I don't care about the mating grounds of the three-anused mud sloth or any other random biome."

"We're part of the ecology, Ms.

Stratt.

We're not outside it.

The plants we eat, the animals we ranch, the air we breathe-it's all part of the tapestry.

It's all connected.

As the biomes collapse, it'll have a direct impact on humanity."

"Okay, then: numbers,"

Stratt said.

"I want numbers.

Tangible things, not vague predictions."

He scowled at her.

"Okay.

Nineteen years."

"Nineteen years?"

"You wanted a number,"

he said.

"There's a number.

Nineteen years."

"Okay, what's nineteen years?"

"That's my estimate for when half the people currently alive will be dead.

Nineteen years from now."

The silence that followed was unlike anything I'd ever experienced.

Even Stratt was taken aback.

Lokken and I looked to each other.

I don't know why but we did.

Dimitri's mouth fell agape.

"Half?"

Stratt said.

"Three point five billion people?

Dead?"

"Yes,"

he said.

"Is that tangible enough for you?"

"How can you possibly know that?"

she said.

He pursed his lips.

"And just like that another climate denier is born.

See how easy it is?

All I have to do is tell you something you don't want to hear."

"Don't patronize me, Dr.

Leclerc.

Just answer my questions."

He crossed his arms.

"We're already seeing major weather- pattern disruptions."

Lokken cleared her throat.

"I heard there were tornadoes in Europe?"

"Yes,"

he said.

"And they're happening more and more often.

European languages didn't even have a word for tornado until Spanish conquistadors saw them in North America.

Now they're happening in Italy, Spain, and Greece."

He tilted his head.

"Partially, it's because of shifting weather patterns.

And partially it's because some lunatic decided to pave the Sahara Desert with black rectangles.

As if a massive disruption of heat distribution near the Mediterranean Sea wouldn't have any effects."

Stratt rolled her eyes.

"I knew there'd be weather effects.

We just don't have any other choice."

He pressed on.

"Your abuse of the Sahara aside, we're seeing bizarre phenomena all over the world.

The cyclone season is off by two months.

It snowed in Vietnam last week.

The jet stream is a convoluted mess changing day by day.

Arctic air is being brought to places it's never been before, and tropical air is going well north and south.

It's a maelstrom."

"Get back to the three and a half billion dead people,"

Stratt said.

"Sure,"

he said.

"The math of famine is actually pretty easy.

Take all the calories the world creates with farming and agriculture per day, and divide by about fifteen hundred.

The human population cannot be greater than that number.

Not for long, anyway."

He fiddled with a pen on the table.

"I've run the best models I have.

Crops are going to fail.

The global staple crops are wheat, barley, millet, potatoes, soy, and most important: rice.

All of them are pretty sensitive about temperature ranges.

If your rice paddy freezes over, the rice dies.

If your potato farm floods, the potatoes die.

And if your wheat farm experiences ten times normal humidity, it gets fungal parasites and dies."

He looked at Stratt again.

"If only we had a stable supply of three-anused mud sloths, maybe we'd survive."

Stratt pinched her chin.

"Nineteen years isn't enough time.

It'll take thirteen years for the Hail Mary to get to Tau Ceti, and another thirteen for any results or data to come back.

We need at least twenty-six years.

Twenty-seven would be better."

He looked at her as if she'd grown another head.

"What are you saying?

This isn't some optional outcome.

This is happening.

And there's nothing we can do about it."

"Nonsense,"

she said.

"Humanity has been accidentally causing global warming for a century.

Let's see what we can do when we really set our minds to it."

He drew back.

"What?

Are you kidding?"

"A nice blanket of greenhouse gases would buy us some time, right?

It would insulate Earth like a parka and make the energy we are getting last longer.

Am I wrong?"

"Wha-"

he stammered.

"You aren't wrong, but the scale...

and the morality of deliberately causing greenhouse-gas emissions..."

"I don't care about morality,"

Stratt said.

"She really doesn't,"

I said.

"I care about saving humanity.

So get me some greenhouse effect.

You're a climatologist.

Come up with something to make us last at least twenty-seven years.

I'm not willing to lose half of humanity."

Leclerc gulped.

She made a shooing motion.

"Get to work!"

- It takes three hours and the addition of fifty words to our shared vocabulary, but I am finally able to explain radiation-and its effects on biology-to Rocky.

"Thank,"

he says in unusually low tones.

Sad tones.

"Now I know how my friends died."

"Bad bad bad,"

I say.

"Yes,"

he chimes.

During the conversation, I learned the Blip-A has no radiation protection at all.

And I know why Eridians never discovered radiation.

It took a while to assemble all of this information, but here is what I know: The Eridian homeworld is the first planet in the 40 Eridani system.

Humans actually spotted it a while ago, obviously not knowing there was a whole civilization there.

The catalog name for it is "40 Eridani A b."

That's a mouthful.

The planet's actual name, from the Eridians, is a collection of chords like any other Eridian word.

So I'll just call it "Erid."

Erid is extremely close to its star-about one-fifth as far as Earth is from our sun.

Their "year"

is a little over forty-two Earth days long.

It's what we call a "super-Earth,"

weighing in at eight and a half times Earth's mass.

It's about twice Earth's diameter, and a little over double the surface gravity.

Also, it spins very fast.

Absurdly fast.

Their day is only 5.1 hours long.

That's when things started to fall into place.

Planets get magnetic fields if the conditions are right.

You have to have a molten-iron core, you have to be in the magnetic field of a star, and you have to be spinning.

If all three of these things are true, you get a magnetic field.

Earth has one-that's why compasses work.

Erid has all of those features on steroids.

They are larger than Earth, with a larger iron core.

They are close to their star, so they have a much stronger magnetic field powering their own field, and they spin extremely fast.

All told, Erid's magnetic field is at least twenty-five times as strong as Earth's.

Plus, their atmosphere is extremely thick.

Twenty-nine times as thick.

You know what strong magnetic fields and thick atmospheres are really good at?

Radiation protection.

All life on Earth evolved to deal with radiation.

Our DNA has error-correction built in because we're constantly bombarded with radiation from the sun and from space in general.

Our magnetic field and atmosphere protect us somewhat, but not 100 percent.

For Erid, it's 100 percent.

Radiation just doesn't get to the ground.

Light doesn't even get to the ground-that's why they never evolved eyes.

The surface is pitch-dark.

How does a biosphere exist in total darkness?

I haven't asked Rocky how that works yet, but there is plenty of life deep in Earth's oceans where the sun doesn't shine.

So it's definitely doable.

Eridians are extremely susceptible to radiation, and they never even knew it existed.

The next conversation took another hour and added a few dozen more words to the vocabulary.

Eridians invented space travel quite a while ago.

And with their unparalleled materials technology (xenonite) they actually made a space elevator.

Basically a cable leading from Erid's equator up to the synchronous orbit with a counterweight.

They literally take elevators to get into orbit.

We could do that on Earth if we knew how to make xenonite.

Thing is, they never left orbit.

There was no reason to.

Erid has no moon.

Planets that close to a star rarely do.

The gravitation tidal forces tend to rip would-be moons out of orbit.

Rocky and his crew were the first Eridians to leave orbit at all.

So they never found out that Erid's magnetic field, which extends well beyond its synchronous orbit, had been protecting them all that time.

One mystery remained.

"Why did I not die, question?"

Rocky asks.

"I don't know,"

I say.

"What's different?

What do you do that the rest of your crew didn't do?"

"I fix things.

My job is to repair broken things, create needed things, and keep engines running."

Sounds like an engineer to me.

"Where were you most of the time?"

"I have room in ship.

Workshop."

I'm getting an idea.

"Where is workshop?"

"In back of ship near engines."

That's a sensible place to put your ship's engineer.

Near the engines, where things are most likely to need maintenance or repairs.

"Where does your ship store Astrophage fuel?"

He waves a hand generally around the rear of the ship.

"Many many containers of Astrophage.

All in back of ship.

Close to engines.

Easy to refuel."

And there's the answer.

I sigh.

He's not going to like this.

The solution was so simple.

They just didn't know it.

They didn't even know the problem until it was too late.

"Astrophage stops radiation,"

I say.

"You were surrounded by Astrophage most of the time.

Your crewmates weren't.

So the radiation got to them."

He doesn't respond.

He needs a moment to let that sink in.

"Understand,"

he says in low notes.

"Thank.

I now know why I not die."

I try to imagine the desperation of his people.

With a space program far behind Earth's, no knowledge of what's outside, and still making an interstellar ship in a bid to save their race.

No different from my situation, I guess.

I just have a little more technology.

"Radiation is here too,"

I say.

"Stay in your workshop as much as you can."

"Yes."

"Bring Astrophage to this tunnel and put it on the wall."

"Yes.

You do same."

"I don't need to."

"Why not, question?"

Because it doesn't matter if I get cancer.

I'm going to die here anyway.

But I don't want to explain that I'm on a suicide mission right now.

The conversation's been pretty heavy already.

So I'll tell him a half-truth.

"Earth's atmosphere is thin and our magnetic field is weak.

Radiation gets to the surface.

So Earth life evolved to survive radiation."

"Understand,"

he says.

He continues working on his repairs while I float in the tunnel.

A random thought occurs to me.

"Hey, I have a question."

"Ask."

"Why is Eridian science and human science so similar?

Billions of years, but almost the same progress."

It's been bugging me for a while.

Humans and Eridians evolved separately in separate star systems.

We had no contact with each other until now.

So why is it that we have almost identical technology?

I mean, Eridians are a little behind us in space technology, but not a ton.

Why aren't they in their stone age?

Or some superfuturistic age that makes modern Earth look antiquated?

"Has to be, or you and I would not meet,"

Rocky says.

"If planet has less science, it no can make spaceship.

If planet has more science it can understand and destroy Astrophage without leaving their system.

Eridian and human science both in special range: Can make ship, but can't solve Astrophage problem."

Huh.

I hadn't thought of that.

But it's obvious now that Rocky says it.

If this happened when Earth was in the Stone Age, we would have just died.

And if it happened a thousand years from now, we'd probably work out how to deal with Astrophage without breaking a sweat.

There is a fairly narrow band of technological advancement that would cause a species to send a ship to Tau Ceti to look for answers.

Eridians and humans both fall into that band.

"Understand.

Good observation."

But it nags at me.

"Still unusual.

Humans and Eridians are close in space.

Earth and Erid are only sixteen light-years apart.

The galaxy is one hundred thousand light-years wide!

Life must be rare.

But we are so close together."

"Possible we are family."

We're related?

How could- "Oh!

You mean...whoa!"

I have to wrap my head around this one.

"I not certain.

Theory."

"It's a darn good theory!"

I say.

The panspermia theory.

I argued with Lokken about it all the time.

Earth life and Astrophage are way too similar for it to be coincidence.

I suspected Earth was "seeded"

by some ancestor of Astrophage.

Some interstellar progenitor species that infected my planet.

But it never occurred to me until now that the same thing might have happened to Erid.

There could be life all over the place!

Anywhere it can possibly evolve from an Astrophage-like ancestor into the cells I have today.

I don't know what this "pre-Astrophage"

organism would be like, but Astrophage is pretty darn tough.

So any planet that can possibly support life of any kind would be likely to get it.

Rocky might be a long-lost relative.

Very long.

The trees outside my house back home are closer relatives to me than Rocky.

But still.

Wow.

"Very good theory!"

I say again.

"Thank,"

Rocky says.

I guess he'd worked that all out a while ago.

But I still had to let it sink in.

- For once, an aircraft carrier was the perfect place to be.

The Chinese Navy didn't even question Stratt's orders anymore.

The higher-ups got sick of approving every action and finally just issued a general order to do whatever she said as long as it didn't involve firing weapons.

We anchored off the coast of western Antarctica in the dead of night.

The coastline sat in the extreme distance, visible only by moonlight.

The entire continent had been evacuated of humans.

Probably an overreaction-the AmundsenScott South Pole Station was 1,500 kilometers away.

The people there would have been just fine.

Still, no reason to take chances.

It was the largest naval exclusion zone in history.

So big, even the U.S.

Navy had to stretch itself thin to make sure no commercial ships entered the area.

Stratt spoke into a walkie-talkie.

"Destroyer One, confirm observation status."

"Ready,"

came an American accent.

"Destroyer Two, confirm observation status."

"Ready,"

came a different American's voice.

The scientific team stood together on the carrier's flight deck, staring toward land.

Dimitri and Lokken hung back away from the edge.

Redell was off in Africa running the blackpanel farm.

And of course Stratt stood slightly ahead of everyone else.

Leclerc looked for all the world like a man being led to the gallows.

"We're almost ready,"

he said with a sigh.

Stratt clicked on her walkie-talkie again.

"Submarine One, confirm observation status."

"Ready,"

came the response.

Leclerc checked his tablet.

"Three minutes...mark."

"All ships: We are at Condition Yellow,"

Stratt said into her radio.

"Repeat: Condition Yellow.

Submarine Two, confirm observation status."

"Ready."

I stood next to Leclerc.

"This is unbelievable,"

I said.

He shook his head.

"I wish to God this wasn't on my shoulders."

He fiddled with his tablet.

"You know, Dr.

Grace, I have spent my entire life as an unapologetic hippie.

From my childhood in Lyon to my university days in Paris.

I am a tree- hugging antiwar throwback to a bygone era of protest politics."

I didn't say anything.

He was having the worst day of his life.

If I could help by just listening, I'd do it.

"I became a climatologist to help save the world.

To stop the nightmarish environmental catastrophe we were sinking ourselves into.

And now...this.

It's necessary, but horrible.

As a scientist yourself, I'm sure you understand."

"Not really,"

I said.

"I spent my whole scientific career looking away from Earth, not toward it.

I'm embarrassingly weak on climate science."

"Mm,"

he said.

"Western Antarctica is a roiling mass of ice and snow.

This whole region is a giant glacier, slowly marching to the sea.

There are hundreds of thousands of square kilometers of ice here."

"And we're going to melt it?"

"The sea will melt it for us, but yes.

Thing is, Antarctica used to be a jungle.

For millions of years it was as lush as Africa.

But continental drift and natural climate change froze it over.

All those plants died and decomposed.

The gases from that decomposition-most notably methane-got trapped in the ice."

"And methane's a pretty powerful greenhouse gas,"

I said.

He nodded.

"Far more powerful than carbon dioxide."

He checked his tablet again.

"Two minutes!"

he called out.

"All ships: Condition Red,"

Stratt radioed.

"Repeat: Condition Red."

He turned back to me.

"So here I am.

Environmental activist.

Climatologist.

Antiwar crusader."

He looked out to sea.

"And I'm ordering a nuclear strike on Antarctica.

Two hundred and forty-one nuclear weapons, courtesy of the United States, buried fifty meters deep along a fissure at three-kilometer intervals.

All going off at the same time."

I nodded slowly.

"They tell me the radiation will be minimal,"

he said.

"Yeah.

If it's any consolation, they're fusion bombs."

I pulled my jacket tighter.

"There's a small fission reaction with uranium and stuff that sets off the much larger fusion reaction.

And the big explosion is just hydrogen and helium.

No radiation from that."

"Well, that's something."

"And this was the only option?"

I asked.

"Why can't we have factories mass-produce sulfur hexafluoride, or some other greenhouse gas?"

He shook his head.

"We'd need thousands of times the production that we could possibly do.

Remember, it took us a century of burning coal and oil on a global scale to even notice it was affecting the climate at all."

He checked his tablet.

"The shelf will cleave at the line of explosions and slowly work its way into the sea and melt.

Sea levels will rise about a centimeter over the next month, the ocean temperature will drop a degree-which is a disaster of its own but never mind that for now.

Enormous quantities of methane will be released into the atmosphere.

And now, methane is our friend.

Methane is our best friend.

And not just because it'll keep us warm for a while."

"Oh?"

"Methane breaks down in the atmosphere after ten years.

We can knock chunks of Antarctica into the sea every few years to moderate the methane levels.

And if Hail Mary finds a solution, we just have to wait ten years for the methane to go away.

You can't do that with carbon dioxide."

Stratt approached us.

"Time?"

"Sixty seconds,"

he said.

She nodded.

"So this solves everything?"

I asked.

"Can we just keep poking Antarctica for more methane to keep Earth's temperature right?"

"No,"

he said.

"It's a stopgap at best.

Dumping this crap into our atmosphere will keep the warmth in the air, but the disruption to our ecosystem will still be massive.

We'll still have horrific and unpredictable weather, crop failures, and biome annihilation.

But maybe, just maybe, it won't be quite as bad as it would have been without the methane."

I looked at Stratt and Leclerc standing side by side.

Never in human history had so much raw authority and power been invested into so few people.

These two people-just these two -were going to literally change the face of the world.

"I'm curious,"

I say to Stratt.

"Once we launch Hail Mary.

What will you do then?"

"Me?"

she said.

"Doesn't matter.

Once the Hail Mary launches, my authority ends.

I'll probably be put on trial by a bunch of pissed-off governments for abuse of power.

Might spend the rest of my life in jail."

"I'll be in the cell next to you,"

said Leclerc.

"Are you at all concerned about that?"

She shrugged.

"We all have to make sacrifices.

If I have to be the world's whipping boy to secure our salvation, then that's my sacrifice to make."

"You have a strange logic to you,"

I said.

"Not really.

When the alternative is death to your entire species, things are very easy.

No moral dilemmas, no weighing what's best for whom.

Just a single-minded focus on getting this project working."

"That's what I tell myself,"

Leclerc said.

"Three...two...

one...detonation."

Nothing happened.

The coastline remained as it was.

No explosion.

No flash.

Not even a pop.

He looked at his tablet.

"The nukes have detonated.

The shockwave should be here in ten minutes or so.

It'll just sound like distant thunder, though."

He looked down at the carrier deck.

Stratt put her hand on his shoulder.

"You did what you had to do.

We're all doing what we have to do."

He buried his face in his hands and cried.

- Rocky and I talk about biology for hours.

Both of us are intensely interested in how the other's body works.

We'd be pretty lame scientists if we weren't.

Eridian physiology is, frankly, amazing.

Erid is so close to its star, the sheer amount of energy entering the biosphere is ridiculous.

And Eridians, being at the top of the food chain, have a heck of a lot more energy to work with than human bodies do.

How much more?

They have sacs in their body that just hold ATP-the main energy-storage medium of DNA-based life.

Usually it lives in cells, but they have so much they have to evolve more efficient storage for it.

We're talking absurd amounts of energy here.

They pull oxygen off minerals to get metals.

Eridians are, in effect, biological smelters.

Humans have hair, fingernails, tooth enamel, and other "dead"

stuff on our bodies that serve critical purposes.

Eridians take that concept to the ultimate extreme.

Rocky's carapace is made of oxidized minerals.

His bones are honeycombed metallic alloys.

His blood is mostly liquid mercury.

Even his nerves are inorganic silicates transmitting light-based impulses.

All told, Rocky only has a few kilograms of biological material.

Single-celled organisms travel through the bloodstream, building up or repairing the body as needed.

They also manage digestion and service the brain, which sits safely in the center of his carapace.

If bees evolved to make hives that could walk, and the queen was as intelligent as a human, that life-form would be similar to an Eridian.

Except the Eridian's "bees"

are single-celled organisms.

Eridian muscles are inorganic.

They're made of porous, sponge-like material sealed in flexible sacs.

The majority of the body's water is tied up in those sacs.

And the atmospheric pressure is so high, the 210C water is still a liquid.

They have two separate circulatory systems: the "ambient"

system and the "hot"

system.

The ambient blood is 210 degrees Celsius.

But the hot blood is kept at 305 degrees, which is hot enough to boil water even at Erid's air pressure.

Both circulatory systems have blood vessels that expand or contract around the muscles as needed to set their temperature.

Want to expand?

Make it hot.

Want to contract?

Make it cold.

In short: Eridians are steam-powered.

Because of this, the ambient circulatory system ends up as the heat sinks when muscles are cooled.

It constantly needs to be cooled back down to normal temperature, hence the radiator.

Rocky "breathes"

in a sense, but only to pass outside ammonia across capillaries in a radiator-like organ in the top of his carapace.

Five slits at the top allow the air in and out, but at no point does any of it enter his bloodstream.

While Eridians don't "breathe,"

they do still use oxygen.

They're just much more self-contained than a human body.

They have plant-like cells and animal-like cells inside.

Oxygen to CO2, CO2 to oxygen, back and forth, always kept in balance.

Rocky's body is a little biosphere.

All it needs is energy via food and airflow to dump heat.

Meanwhile, the hot blood is too hot for any biological material to survive inside-it boils the water inside.

This is handy for sterilizing incoming food of pathogens, by the way.

But in order for his worker cells to service any part of the hot-blood system, the system has to be cooled to ambient levels.

And when that happens, the Eridian can't use muscles at all.

And that's why Eridians sleep.

They don't "sleep"

like a human does.

They're legitimately paralyzed.

And the brain, also being maintained, has no conscious function during that period.

A sleeping Eridian can't wake up.

That's why they keep an eye on each other when they sleep.

Someone has to keep you safe.

Probably dates back to caveman (cave-Eridian?) days, and now it's just a social norm.

As amazed as I am at all that, to Rocky it's a boring topic.

Meanwhile, he's utterly shocked and amazed by humanity.

"You hear light, question?"

Rocky says.

(He puts a little quaver on the first note of his sentence when he's surprised or impressed.) "Yes.

I hear light."

While we chat, he uses his many hands to assemble some complicated-looking piece of equipment.

It's almost as big as he is.

I recognize several parts on it as things he's been repairing these past few days.

He can hold a conversation and work on delicate machinery at the same time.

I think Eridians are much better at doing multiple tasks than humans are.

"How, question?"

he asks.

"How can you hear light, question?"

I point to my eyes.

"These are special body parts that focus and detect light.

They send the information to my brain."

"Light gives you information, question?

Enough information to understand room, question?"

"Yes.

Light gives information to humans like sound gives information to Eridians."

A thought occurs to him.

He stops working on his device entirely.

"You hear light from space, question?

You hear stars, planets, asteroids, question?"

"Yes."

"Amaze.

What about sound, question?

You can hear sound."

I point to my ears.

"I hear sound with these.

How do you hear sound?"

He gestures all over his carapace and arms.

"Everywhere.

Tiny receptors on outer shell.

All report back to brain.

Like touch."

So his whole body is a microphone.

His brain must be doing some serious processing.

It has to know the exact position of the body, sense the time difference between sound hitting different parts of it...man, that's interesting.

But hey, my brain gives me an entire 3-D model of my surroundings just from two eyeballs.

Sensory input is really impressive across the board.

"I can't hear as well as you,"

I say.

"Without light, I can't understand the room.

I can hear you talk, but no more."

He points to the divider.

"This is wall."

"This is a special wall.

Light passes through this wall."

"Amaze.

I give you many choices for wall when first build.

You choose this because light pass through, question?"

It seems like so long ago-back when the divider was a mosaic of hexagons of different textures and colors.

I'd picked the clear one, of course.

"Yes.

I chose this because light passes through."

"Amaze.

I gave choices for different  of sound.

Never thought of light."

I glance at the laptop to check what that mystery word was.

I almost never have to look at the laptop now.

Still, once in a while there's a chord I just don't remember.

The computer reports that word was "qualities."

Okay, I can't fault myself for not knowing it.

That one doesn't come up very often.

"Just good luck,"

I say.

"Good luck,"

he agrees.

He makes a few more adjustments to the device, puts his tools back in his bandolier, then says, "I am done."

"What is it?"

"Device keeps me alive in small room."

He looks happy.

I think.

He's holding his carapace just a little higher than usual.

"Wait."

He disappears back into his ship, leaving the device behind.

He returns with several plates of transparent xenonite.

Each plate is a pentagon about a centimeter thick and a foot across.

I hate myself for thinking in hybrid units like that.

But that's what my brain came up with.

"I make room now,"

he says.

He assembles the pentagons edge to edge, using some kind of thick liquid glue from a tube to hold them together.

Soon, he has two halves of a dodecahedron assembled.

He holds them toward me proudly and places them together.

"Room."

The "room"

is a geodesic sphere made of pentagons.

The total diameter is about a meter.

Easily big enough to contain Rocky.

"What's the purpose of that room?"

I ask.

"Room and device keep me alive in you ship."

I raise my eyebrows.

"You're coming into my ship?"

"Want to see human technology.

Is allowed, question?"

"Yes!

Allowed!

What do you want to see?"

"Everything!

Human science better than Eridian science."

He points to the laptop floating beside me.

"Machine that think.

Eridians no have that."

He points to my toolkit.

"Many machines there Eridians no have."

"Yes.

Come look at anything you want!"

I point to the small airlock drawer in the divider wall.

"How will you get it through that?"

"You leave tunnel.

I make new divider wall.

Bigger airlock."

He pulls the completed device-which I now realize is a life- support system-onto his carapace and straps it on.

It covers the radiator slits at the top of his carapace.

"Is that blocking your radiator?

Isn't that dangerous?"

"No.

This make hot air into cold air,"

he says.

Air conditioning.

Not what I think of when I see a species that lives comfortably at over 200 degrees Celsius.

But we all have our tolerances.

He seals the globe around himself with glue.

"I test."

He just floats there for a minute.

Then, he says, "Works!

Happy!"

"Great!"

I say.

"How does it work, though?

Where does the heat go?"

"Easy,"

he says.

He taps one small part of the device.

"Astrophage here.

Astrophage take all heat hotter than ninety-six degrees."

Ah, right.

To humans, Astrophage is hot.

To Eridians, it's quite cold.

And it's the perfect air-conditioning medium.

All Rocky has to do is run the air over some Astrophage-filled cooling fins or something.

"Clever,"

I say.

"Thank.

You leave now.

I make large airlock for tunnel."

"Yes yes yes!"

I say.

I collect all my belongings in the tunnel, including the mattress clamped to the wall, and stuff them into the control room, then go into the control room myself and seal both airlock doors.

I spend the next hour tidying up.

I wasn't expecting company.

I t's been a few hours.

But I just have to know.

How does he modify the tunnel?

He needs massive atmospheric pressure to stay alive.

My hull can't handle that.

And he can't handle being in a vacuum.

So how does he make modifications?

I hear clinks and clanks from the other side of the airlock.

This time I'm going to find out!

I enter the airlock and look through the porthole.

The Blip-A's hull robot has removed the old tunnel and is installing a new one.

Oh.

Well.

That's anticlimactic.

The old tunnel drifts off into space-its use is at an end, apparently.

The robot places the new tunnel in position and administers xenonite glue along the edge of the Blip-A's hull.

How did Eridians pilot a ship that traveled near the speed of light without using computers?

Dead reckoning?

They're pretty good at doing math in their heads.

Maybe they never needed to invent computers.

But still.

No matter how good they are at math, there are limits.

The clunking stops.

I peek out the window again.

The tunnel has been fully installed.

It looks like the previous tunnel, except it has a much larger airlock section.

Pretty much the entire divider wall is a cabinet large enough to hold Rocky with room to spare.

It is not, however, large enough to hold me.

I guess I won't be visiting the Blip-A anytime soon.

"Hmph,"

I say.

I try not to let it bother me, but come on.

He gets to see an alien spaceship.

How come I don't get to see one?

Rocky's side of the tunnel no longer has the network of gripping bars.

Instead, there is a metal stripe running along the long axis of the tunnel.

It extends into the divider airlock and further into my side of the tunnel.

It leads right up to my airlock door.

Opposite the metal stripe is what looks like a pipe.

It's made of the same drab xenonite browns and tans that the tunnel wall is made of.

And it's square.

It also runs the long axis of the tunnel.

With a whoosh, Rocky's side of the tunnel fills with fog.

Then a second whoosh fills my side.

That's what the pipe was for, I guess.

Delivering the appropriate atmosphere to both sides.

I'm glad Rocky has a supply of oxygen to work with.

The Blip-A door opens, and Rocky emerges, encased in his geodesic ball.

He wears something like overalls with a bandolier across the bottom of his carapace.

The AC unit is on his back.

Two of his hands hold metal blocks.

The other three are free.

One of them waves to me.

I wave back.

The spaceball (what else should I call it?) floats into the airlock and then sticks to the metal plate.

"What?"

I say.

"How..."

Then I see it.

The ball didn't magically move.

Those blocks Rocky is holding are magnets.

Fairly powerful ones, I guess.

And the metal strip is obviously magnetic.

Probably iron.

He rolls the ball along the metal line and into the divider airlock.

He manipulates metal controls through the xenonite shell with his magnets.

It's mesmerizing to watch.

After some hissing and the sound of pumps, he repels a plate away, which opens up the door on my side of the airlock.

From there, he rolls along the metal line to my door.

I open it.

"Hello!"

"Hello!"

"So...do I carry you around?

Is that the plan?"

"Yes.

Carry.

Thank."

I gingerly grab the ball, worried it might be hot.

But it isn't.

Among other things, xenonite is an excellent insulator.

I pull him through and into the ship.

Rocky is heavy.

Much heavier than I thought he would be.

If there were gravity, I probably wouldn't be able to lift him at all.

As it is, he has a lot of inertia.

It takes a lot of oomph to pull him along.

It's like pushing a motorcycle in neutral.

Seriously- he's as heavy as a motorcycle.

I shouldn't be surprised.

He told me all about his biology and how it uses metals.

Heck, his blood is mercury.

Of course he's heavy.

"You are very heavy,"

I say.

I hope he doesn't take that to mean Hey, fatty!

Go on a diet!

"My mass is one hundred sixty-eight kilograms,"

he says.

Rocky weighs over 300 pounds!

"Wow,"

I say.

"You weigh a lot more than me."

"What is you mass, question?"

"Maybe eighty kilograms."

"Humans have very small mass!"

he says.

"I'm mostly water,"

I say.

"Anyway.

This is the control room.

I operate the ship from here."

"Understand."

I push him ahead of me down the tunnel to the lab.

He skitters around within his ball.

He tends to shift around when he's looking at something new.

I think it helps him get a better "view"

of things with his sonar.

Kind of like a dog tilting its head to get more information about a sound.

"This is my lab,"

I say.

"All the science happens here."

"Good good good room!"

he squeals.

His voice is a full octave higher than normal.

"Want to understand all!"

"I'll answer any questions you have,"

I say.

"Later.

More rooms!"

"More rooms!"

I say dramatically.

I push him along into the dormitory.

I give us a very slow velocity so he can take it all in from the center of the room.

"I sleep here.

Well, I used to.

Then you made me sleep in the tunnel."

"You sleep alone, question?"

"Yes."

"I also sleep alone many times.

Sad sad sad."

He just doesn't get it.

A fear of sleeping alone is probably hardwired in his brain.

Interesting...that might have been the beginning of their pack instinct.

And a pack instinct is required for a species to become intelligent.

That weird (to me) sleep pattern could be the reason I'm talking to Rocky right now!

Yeah, that was unscientific.

There are probably a thousand things that led to them being sapient and stuff.

The sleep thing is likely just one part of it.

But hey, I'm a scientist.

I have to come up with theories!

I open a panel to the storage area and push his ball partially inside.

"This is a small room for storage."

"Understand."

I pull him back out.

"That's all the rooms.

My ship is much smaller than yours."

"You ship has much science!"

he says.

"Show me things in science room, question?"

"Sure."

I take him back up to the lab.

He shifts around in the ball, taking it all in.

I float us to the center of the room and grab the edge of the table.

I push the ball against the lab table.

I think it's steel, but I'm not sure.

Most lab tables are.

Let's find out.

"Use your magnets,"

I say.

He pushes one of his magnets against the pentagon face touching the table.

With a clunk the magnet takes hold.

He's now anchored in place.

"Good!"

he says.

He uses his magnets on one face after another to roll across the table and back.

It's not graceful, but it gets the job done.

At least I don't have to hold him in place.

I nudge away from the table and float to the edge of the room.

"There's a lot here.

What do you want to know about first?"

He starts to point in one direction, then stops.

Then he picks a new thing, but stops there too.

Like a kid in a candy shop.

Finally, he settles on the 3-D printer.

"That.

What is that, question?"

"It makes small things.

I tell the computer a shape, and it tells this machine how to make it."

"I can see it make small thing, question?"

"It needs gravity."

"That is why your ship rotates, question?"

"Yes!"

I say.

Wow, he's quick.

"The rotation makes gravity for science things."

"You ship no can rotate with tunnel attached."

"Right."

He thinks it over.

"You ship has more science than my ship.

Better science.

I bring my things into you ship.

Release tunnel.

You make you ship spin for science.

You and me science how to kill Astrophage together.

Save Earth.

Save Erid.

This is good plan, question?"

"Uh...yes!

Good plan!

But what about your ship?"

I tap his xenonite bubble.

"Human science can't make xenonite.

Xenonite is stronger than anything humans have."

"I bring materials to make xenonite.

Can make any shape."

"Understand,"

I say.

"You want to get your things now?"

"Yes!"

I've gone from "sole-surviving space explorer"

to "guy with wacky new roommate."

It'll be interesting to see how this plays out.

- "Have you met Dr.

Lamai?"

Stratt asked.

I shrugged.

"I meet so many people these days I honestly don't know."

The carrier had a sick bay, but that was for the crew.

This was a special medical center set up on the second hangar bay.

Dr.

Lamai pressed her hands together and bowed her head slightly.

"It is a pleasure to meet you, Dr.

Grace."

"Thanks,"

I said.

"Um, you too."

"I've put Dr.

Lamai in charge of all things medical for the Hail Mary,"

Stratt said.

"She was the lead scientist for the company that developed the coma technology we're going to use."

"Nice to meet you,"

I said.

"So you're from Thailand, I assume?"

"Yes,"

she said.

"The company did not survive, unfortunately.

Because the technology only works on one in every seven thousand people and thus has limited commercial potential.

I am very happy that my research may yet help humanity."

"Understatement,"

said Stratt.

"Your technology might save humanity."

Lamai averted her eyes.

"You compliment me too much."

She led us into her lab.

A dozen bays were each full of slightly different apparatus experiments, each connected to an unconscious monkey.

I looked away.

"Do I have to be here?"

"You'll have to excuse Dr.

Grace,"

Stratt said.

"He's a bit...

tender on certain topics."

"I'm fine,"

I said.

"I know animal testing is necessary.

I just don't like to stare at it."

Lamai said nothing.

"Dr.

Grace,"

Stratt said.

"Stop being an asshole.

Dr.

Lamai, please bring us up to speed."

Lamai pointed to a set of metal arms over the nearest test monkey.

"We developed these automated coma-monitoring and care stations when we believed we would have tens of thousands of patients.

It never came to pass."

"Do they work?"

Stratt asked.

"Our original design was not intended to be fully independent.

It would handle everything routine, but if it encountered a problem it could not solve, a human doctor would be alerted."

She walked along the line of unconscious monkeys.

"We are making significant progress on the fully automated version.

This armature is run by extremely high-end software being developed in Bangkok.

It will care for a subject in a coma.

It watches their vitals, applies whatever medical care is needed, feeds them, monitors their fluids, and so on.

It would still be better to have an actual doctor present.

But this is a close second."

"Are they artificial intelligence of some kind?"

Stratt asked.

"No,"

said Lamai.

"We do not have time to develop a complicated neural network.

This is a strictly procedural algorithm.

Very complex, but not AI at all.

We have to be able to test it in thousands of ways and know exactly how it responds and why.

We can't do that with a neural network."

"I see."

She pointed to some diagrams on the wall.

"Our most important breakthrough was, unfortunately, the undoing of our company.

We successfully isolated the genetic markers that indicate long-term coma resistance.

We can run a simple blood test to find out.

And, as you know, once we tested this on the general population, we learned that very, very few people actually have those genes."

"Couldn't you still help those people, though?"

I asked.

"I mean, sure it's only one in seven thousand people, but it's a start, right?"

Lamai shook her head.

"Unfortunately, no.

This is an elective procedure.

There is no pressing medical need to be unconscious throughout chemotherapy.

In fact, it adds a small amount of risk.

So there just would not be enough customers to sustain a company."

Stratt rolled up her sleeve.

"Test my blood for the genes.

I'm curious."

Lamai was briefly taken aback.

"V-Very well, Ms.

Stratt."

She walked over to a rolling supply cart and got a blood-draw kit.

Someone this important wasn't used to doing actual medical grunt work.

But Stratt was Stratt.

Still, Lamai was no slouch.

She got the needle into Stratt without delay and on the first try.

The blood flowed into the tube.

When the blood draw was complete, Stratt rolled down her sleeve.

"Grace.

You're up next."

"Why?"

I asked.

"I'm not volunteering."

"To set an example,"

she said.

"I want everyone on this project, even tangentially related, to get tested.

Astronauts are a rare breed, and only one in seven thousand of them will be coma-resistant.

We might not have enough qualified candidates.

We need to be ready to expand the pool."

"It's a suicide mission,"

I said.

"It's not like we'll have a line of people saying, 'Oh, me!

Please!

Please me!

Pick me!' "

"Actually, we do have that,"

Stratt said.

Lamai poked me in the arm.

I looked away.

I get a little queasy when I see my blood squirting into a tube.

"What do you mean, we have that?"

"We've already had tens of thousands of volunteers.

All with the complete understanding that it's a one-way trip."

"Wow,"

I said.

"How many of them are insane or suicidal?"

"Probably a lot.

But there are hundreds of experienced astronauts on the list too.

Astronauts are brave people, willing to risk their life for science.

Many of them are willing to give their life for humanity.

I admire them."

"Hundreds,"

I say.

"Not thousands.

We'll be lucky if even one of those astronauts qualifies."

"We're already counting on a lot of luck,"

said Stratt.

"May as well hope for some more."

- Shortly after college, my girlfriend Linda moved in with me.

The relationship only lasted eight months beyond that and was a total disaster.

But that's not relevant right now.

When she moved in, I was shocked by the sheer volume of random junk she felt necessary to bring into our small apartment.

Box after box of stuff she had accumulated over decades of never throwing anything out.

Linda was absolutely Spartan compared to Rocky.

He's brought in so much crap we don't have places to store it all.

Almost the entire dormitory is full of duffel-bag things made of a canvas-like material.

They are random muddy colors.

When visual aesthetic doesn't matter, you just get whatever colors the manufacturing process makes.

I don't even know what's in all of them.

He doesn't explain.

Every time I think we might be done, he brings more bags in.

Well, I say "he"

brings them in, but it's me.

He hangs out in his ball, magnetically attached to the wall, while I do all the work.

Again, this is very reminiscent of Linda.

"This is a lot of things,"

I say.

"Yes yes,"

he says.

"I need these things."

"A lot of things."

"Yes yes.

Understand.

Things in tunnel is last things."

"Okay,"

I grumble.

I float back to the tunnel and grab the last few soft boxes.

I maneuver them through the cockpit and lab down to the dormitory.

I find a spot to cram them.

There's very little space left.

I vaguely wonder how much mass we just added to my ship.

I manage to keep the area near my bunk clear.

And there's a spot on the floor that Rocky picked out as his sleeping locale.

The rest of the room is a mad tangle of soft boxes taped to each other, the wall, the other bunks, and anything else that would keep them from floating loose.

"Are we done?"

"Yes.

Now detach tunnel."

I groan.

"You made the tunnel.

You detach it."

"How I detach tunnel, question?

Me inside ball."

"Well, how do I do it?

I don't understand xenonite."

He made a turning motion with two of his arms.

"Rotate tunnel."

"Okay, okay."

I grab my EVA suit.

"I'll do it.

Jerk."

"No understand last word."

"Not important."

I climb into the suit and close the rear flap.

- Rocky is surprisingly adept at doing things with a couple of magnets from inside a ball.

Each of his duffels has a metal pad on it.

He's able to climb along the pile and rearrange it as needed.

Occasionally, a bag he's using for purchase comes loose and he floats off.

When that happens, he calls me and I put him back.

I hang on to my bunk and watch him do his thing.

"Okay, step one.

Astrophage sampling."

"Yes yes."

He holds two hands in front of him and moves one around the other.

"Planet move around Tau.

Astrophage go there from Tau.

Same at Eridani.

Astrophage make more Astrophage with carbon dioxide there."

"Yes,"

I say.

"Did you get a sample?"

"No.

My ship had device for this.

But device broke."

"You couldn't fix it?"

"Device not malfunction.

Device broke.

Fell off ship during trip.

Device gone."

"Oh!

Wow.

Why did it break off?"

He wiggles his carapace.

"Not know.

Many things break.

My people make ship very hurry.

No time to make sure all things work good."

Deadline-induced quality issues: a problem all over the galaxy.

"I tried to make replacement.

Failed.

Tried.

Failed.

Tried.

Failed.

I put ship in path of Astrophage.

Maybe some get stuck on hull.

But robot on hull no can find any.

Astrophage very small."

His carapace slumps down.

His elbows are above the level of his breathing holes.

Sometimes he dips his carapace when sad, but I've never seen him dip it this far.

His voice drops an octave.

"Fail fail fail.

I am repair Eridian.

I not science Eridian.

Smart smart smart science Eridians died."

"Hey...don't think of it like that..."

I say.

"No understand."

"Uh..."

I pull myself over to his pile of bags.

"You're alive.

And you're here.

And you haven't given up."

But his voice remains low.

"I try so many times.

Fail so many times.

Not good at science."

"I am,"

I say.

"I'm a science human.

You're good at making and fixing things.

Together we'll figure this out."

He raises his carapace a bit.

"Yes.

Together.

You have device to sample Astrophage, question?"

The External Collection Unit.

I remember it from my first day in the control room.

I didn't think about it much at the time, but that's got to be it.

"Yes.

I have a device for this."

"Relief!

I try so long.

So many times.

Fail."

He's quiet for a moment.

"Much time here.

Much time alone."

"How long were you here alone?"

He pauses.

"Need new words."

I pull my laptop off the wall.

We run into new words every day, but they're happening fewer and fewer times per day.

That's something.

I launch the frequency analyzer and bring up my dictionary spreadsheet.

"Ready."

"Seven thousand seven hundred and seventy-six seconds is .

Erid rotate one circle in one ."

I immediately recognize the number.

I'd worked it out back when I was studying Rocky's clock.

7,776 is six to the fifth power.

It's exactly how many Eridian seconds it takes to wrap an Eridian clock around to all zeroes again.

They divided their day into a very convenient and (to them) metric number of seconds.

I can follow that.

"Eridian day."

I enter it into my dictionary.

"A planet rotating once is a 'day.' "

"Understand,"

he says.

"Erid circles Eridani one time every 198.8 Eridian days.

198.8 Eridian days is ."

"Year,"

I say, and enter it.

"A planet going around a star once is one year.

So that's an Eridian year."

"We stay with Earth units or you get confused.

How long is Earth day, question?

And how many Earth days is one Earth year, question?"

"One Earth day is 86,400 seconds.

One Earth year is 365.25 Earth days."

"Understand,"

he says.

"I am here forty-six years."

"Forty-six years?!"

I gasp.

"Earth years?!"

"I am here forty-six Earth years, yes."

He's been stuck in this system for longer than I've been alive.

"How...how long do Eridians live?"

He wiggled a claw.

"Average is six hundred eighty-nine years."

"Earth years?"

"Yes,"

he says a little sharply.

"Always Earth units.

You are bad at math, so always Earth units."

I can't even speak for a moment.

"How many years have you been alive?"

"Two hundred ninety-one years."

He pauses.

"Yes.

Earth years."

Holy cow.

Rocky is older than the United States.

He was born around the same time as George Washington.

He's not even that old for his species.

There are old Eridians out there who were alive when Columbus discovered (a bunch of people already living in) North America.

"Why you so surprised, question?"

Rocky asks.

"How long do humans live, question?"

"T his is Earth gravity, question?"

Rocky asks.

His ball rests on the control-room floor next to the pilot seat.

I check the Centrifuge control screen.

We are up to full rotational velocity and spool extension.

The crew compartment has done the 180-degree turn correctly.

The diagram shows the two halves of the ship at full separation.

We are spinning smoothly in the void.

The "Lab Gravity"

value reads "1.00 g."

"Yes.

This is Earth gravity."

He steps side to side, rolling his geodesic dome one face back and forth.

"Not much gravity.

What is value, question?"

"Nine point eight meters per second per second."

"Not much gravity,"

he repeats.

"Erid gravity is 20.48."

"That's a lot of gravity,"

I say.

But that's to be expected.

He'd told me all about Erid before, including its mass and diameter.

I knew their surface gravity had to be roughly double Earth's.

Nice to have my calculations verified, though.

And side note: wow.

Rocky's mass is 168 kilograms.

That means on his homeworld he tips the scales at almost 800 pounds.

And that's his native environment, so I assume he can move around just fine.

Eight hundred pounds and can skitter around effortlessly.

Mental note: Do not get in an arm-wrestling match with an Eridian.

"So,"

I say, leaning back in the pilot's seat.

"What's the plan?

Fly into the Petrova line and get some Astrophage?"

"Yes!

But first I make xenonite room for me."

He points down the hatchway toward the rest of the crew compartment.

"Mostly in sleep room.

But tunnels in lab and small area in control room.

Is okay, question?"

Well, he can't just stay in a ball forever.

"Yes, that's fine.

Where is the xenonite?"

"Xenonite parts in bags in dormitory.

Liquids.

Mix.

Become xenonite."

Like epoxy.

But really, really strong epoxy.

"Interesting!

Someday I want to know all about xenonite."

"I not understand science.

I just use.

Apology."

"That's okay.

I can't explain how to make a thinking machine.

I just use it."

"Good.

You understand."

"How long will your xenonite construction take?"

"Four days.

Could be five days.

Why you ask, question?"

"I want to work fast."

"Why so fast, question?

Slower is safer.

Less mistakes."

I shift in my chair.

"Earth is in a bad state.

It's getting worse all the time.

I have to hurry."

"Not understand,"

says Rocky.

"Why Earth so bad so fast, question?

Erid go bad slower.

Have at least seventy-two years before big problems."

Seventy-two years?

Man, I wish Earth had that kind of time.

But seventy-two years from now Earth will be a frozen wasteland and 99 percent of the human population will be dead.

Why isn't Erid as badly affected?

I furrow my brow.

I only have to think for a moment before I have my answer: It's all about thermal energy storage.

"Erid is much hotter than Earth,"

I say.

"And Erid is much larger with a much thicker atmosphere.

So Erid has a whole lot more heat stored in its air.

Earth is getting cold fast.

Very fast.

In fourteen more years, most humans will be dead."

His voice becomes monotone.

It's a very serious intonation.

"Understand.

Stress.

Concern."

"Yes."

He clicks two claws together.

"Then we work.

We work now!

Learn how to kill Astrophage.

You return to Earth.

You explain.

Save Earth!"

I sigh.

I'm going to have to explain this eventually.

May as well be now.

"I'm not going back.

I'm going to die here."

His carapace shudders.

"Why, question?"

"My ship only had enough fuel for the trip here.

I don't have enough to go home.

I have tiny little probes that will return to Earth with my findings.

But I will stay here."

"Why is mission like this, question?"

"This was all the fuel my planet could make in time."

"You knew this when you left Earth, question?"

"Yes."

"You are good human."

"Thanks."

I try not to think about my impending doom.

"So, let's collect Astrophage.

I have ideas for how we can get some samples.

My equipment is very good at detecting trace amounts -"

"Wait."

He holds up a claw.

"How much Astrophage you ship need for return to Earth, question?"

"Uh...just over two million kilograms,"

I say.

"I can give,"

he says.

I sit up in my chair.

"What?!"

"I can give.

I have extra.

Can give that much and still have plenty for my return to Erid.

You can have."

My heart skips a beat.

"Seriously?!

It's a lot of fuel!

Let me repeat it: two million kilograms.

Two times ten to the sixth power!"

"Yes.

I have much Astrophage.

My ship was more efficient than planned on trip here.

You can have two million kilograms."

I fall back into my seat.

I pant.

I almost hyperventilate.

My eyes well up.

"Oh my God..."

"No understand."

I wipe away tears.

"You are okay, question?"

"Yes!"

I sob.

"Yes, I'm okay.

Thank you!

Thank you thank you!"

"I am happy.

You no die.

Let's save planets!"

I break down, crying tears of joy.

I'm going to live!

- Half the Chinese crew stood on the flight deck.

Some were actually doing their jobs, but most were there to catch a look at humanity's saviors.

The whole science team was there as well.

The same set of usual suspects we had at our weekly status meetings.

Stratt, me, Dimitri, Lokken, and our latest science addition, Dr.

Lamai.

Oh, and no science team would be complete without a gambling-addicted swindler, so Bob Redell was there too.

To be fair, Bob had done his job well.

He had managed the Sahara Astrophage Farm magnificently.

It's rare to find a scientist who is also a good administrator.

It was no easy task, but the farm was generating Astrophage at the levels he'd promised.

The helicopter came in low and slow, then landed perfectly on the helipad.

A ground crew rushed up to secure it.

The rotors remained spinning and the cargo door opened.

Three people walked out, each dressed in blue jumpsuits, each bearing their country's flag on the shoulder.

A Chinese man, a Russian woman, and an American man.

The ground crew ushered them to a safe distance, and the chopper took off again.

Moments later, a second helicopter landed.

Just like the first, this helicopter carried three astronauts.

In this case, a Russian man, a Russian woman, and an American woman.

These six would be the prime and backup crews for the Hail Mary.

Either of the helicopters could easily have carried all six astronauts, but Stratt had a very strict rule: Under no circumstances could any crewmember and their backup share a plane, helicopter, or car.

Each position was specialized and would require years of specific training.

We wouldn't want one car crash to ruin humanity's chances of survival.

The candidate pool wasn't deep.

There just weren't many coma-resistant people out there who had "the right stuff"

and were willing to go on a suicide mission.

Still, even with the reduced pool, the winnowing and selection process had been long, brutal, and filled with endless politicking by every government involved.

Stratt stayed firm and insisted on only the best candidates, but some concessions had to be made.

"Women,"

I said.

"Yes,"

Stratt grumbled.

"Despite your guidelines."

"Yes."

"Good."

"No, it isn't."

She frowned.

"I got overruled by the Americans and Russians on it."

I folded my arms.

"I never would have thought a woman would be so sexist against women."

"It's not sexism.

It's realism."

She righted a strand of hair that had blown into her face.

"My guidelines were that all candidates must be heterosexual men."

"Why not all heterosexual women?"

"The vast majority of scientists and trained astronaut candidates are men.

It's the world we live in.

Don't like it?

Encourage your female students to get into STEM.

I'm not here to enact social equality.

I'm here to do whatever's necessary to save humanity."

"Still seems sexist."

"Call it what you like.

There's no room on this mission for sexual tension.

What happens if there's some kind of romantic entanglement?

Or dispute?

People kill for less."

I looked across the deck to the candidates.

Captain Yang welcomed them aboard.

He took special interest in his countryman-the two were all smiles and handshakes.

"You didn't want a Chinese guy either.

You thought their space program was still too young.

But I hear you picked him to be the prime crew commander."

"He's the most qualified.

So he's the commander."

"Maybe the Russians and Americans over there are qualified too.

Maybe the people literally saving the world will keep it professional.

Maybe cutting off literally half of the talent pool because you're afraid astronauts can't keep it in their pants isn't a good idea."

"We'll have to hope so.

The Russian woman-Ilyukhina-is on the prime crew as well.

She's a materials expert and by far the best candidate for the task.

The science expert is Martin DuBois-the American man.

Two men and one woman.

Recipe for disaster."

I put my hand to my chest in mock surprise.

"Goodness me!

DuBois appears to be black!

I'm surprised you allowed it!

Aren't you afraid he'll ruin the mission with talk of rap music and basketball?"

"Oh, shut up,"

she said.

We watched the astronauts get surrounded by deck crew.

They were absolutely starstruck-especially with Yo.

"DuBois has three doctorates-physics, chemistry, and biology."

Stratt pointed to the American woman.

"Over there is Annie Shapiro.

She invented a new kind of DNA splicing that's now called the Shapiro method."

"Seriously?"

I said.

"The Annie Shapiro?

She invented three entire enzymes from scratch to splice DNA using-"

"Yes, yes.

Very smart lady."

"She did it for her PhD thesis.

Her thesis.

Do you know how many people are on track for a Nobel Prize from research they did in grad school?

Not many, I can tell you that much.

And she's your second choice for the science expert?"

"She's the most talented DNA splicing specialist alive.

But DuBois has strength in a huge variety of fields, and that's more important.

We don't know what they're going to encounter out there.

We need someone with a broad knowledge base."

"Amazing people,"

I said.

"Best of the best."

"I'm glad you're impressed.

Because you'll be training DuBois and Shapiro."

"Me?"

I asked.

"I don't know how to train astronauts!"

"NASA and Roscosmos will teach them the astronaut stuff,"

she said.

"You're going to teach them science stuff."

"Are you kidding?

They're way smarter than me.

What would I teach them?"

"Don't sell yourself short,"

said Stratt.

"You're the world's leading expert on Astrophage biology.

You're going to impart every single thing you know about it to both of them.

Here comes the prime crew."

Yo, Ilyukhina, and DuBois walked over to Stratt.

Yo bowed.

He spoke with a very slight accent, but otherwise perfect English.

"Ms.

Stratt.

It is an honor to finally meet you.

Please accept my deepest gratitude for selecting me as the commander for this critical mission."

"Nice to meet you too,"

she said.

"You were the most qualified.

No thanks required."

"Hello!"

Ilyukhina lunged forward and hugged Stratt.

"I'm here to die for Earth!

Pretty awesome, yes?!"

I leaned to Dimitri.

"Are all Russians crazy?"

"Yes,"

he said with a smile.

"It is the only way to be Russian and happy at the same time."

"That's...dark."

"That's Russian!"

DuBois shook Stratt's hand and spoke so softly as to be almost inaudible.

"Ms.

Stratt.

Thank you for this opportunity.

I won't let you down."

I and the other science leads all shook hands with the three astronauts.

It was a disorganized affair, more like a cocktail mixer than a formal meeting.

In the middle of it all, DuBois turned to me.

"I believe you're Ryland Grace?"

"Yeah,"

I said.

"It's an honor to meet you.

What you're doing is just...I can't even comprehend the sacrifice you're making.

Or should I not talk about it?

I don't know.

Maybe we don't talk about it?"

He smiled.

"It's on my mind quite often.

We don't have to avoid the subject.

Besides, you and I are birds of a feather, it would seem."

I shrugged.

"I guess so.

I mean, you're way more advanced than I am, but I do love cellular biology."

"Well, yes, that too,"

he said.

"But I was talking about coma resistance.

I hear you have the coma-resistance markers, just like me and the rest of the crew."

"I do?"

He raised his eyebrow.

"They didn't tell you?"

"No!"

I shot a look over to Stratt.

She was busy talking to Embezzler Bob and Commander Yo.

"First I'm hearing of it."

"That's odd,"

he said.

"Why wouldn't she tell me?"

"You're asking the wrong person, Dr.

Grace.

But my guess is they only told Stratt and she only told people who needed to know."

"It's my DNA,"

I grumbled.

"Someone should have told me."

DuBois deftly changed the subject.

"In any event: I am looking forward to learning all about the Astrophage life-cycle.

Dr.

Shapiro-my counterpart on the backup crew-is also very excited.

We shall be a classroom of two, I suppose.

Do you have any experience teaching?"

"Actually, yes,"

I said.

"A lot."

"Excellent."

- I'm all smiles.

It's been three days since I found out I won't die and I'm still all smiles.

Well, actually, I could still easily die.

The trip home is long and dangerous.

Just because I survived my coma on the way here, that doesn't mean I'll survive it on the way home.

Maybe I can stay awake and just eat the feeding-tube slurry when my normal food runs out?

I can do four years all alone, right?

We were in comas to keep from killing one another.

But solitary confinement is a whole different set of psychological damage.

I should read up on it.

But not now.

Right now I have to save Earth.

My own survival is a problem for later.

But it's a problem, not a hopeless guarantee of death.

The light on the Centrifuge screen blinks green.

"Gravity at full,"

I say with a smile.

We were back in zero g for a short time, but now I have the centrifuge going again.

I had to "spin down"

because I needed to use the engines.

We can't have centrifugal gravity and propulsion at the same time.

Just imagine firing up the spin drives while the ship is in two pieces connected by a hundred meters of cable.

It's not a pleasant thought.

During the decades (gasp!) that Rocky's been here, he surveyed the system very well.

He gave me all the information he'd accumulated.

He cataloged six planets, noted their size, mass, positions, orbital characteristics, and general atmospheric makeup.

He didn't have to travel around to do it.

He just did astronomical observations from the Blip-A.

Turns out Eridians are as curious about things as humans are.

And it's a good thing too.

This isn't Star Trek.

I can't just flip on a scanner and get all that information about a star system.

It took Rocky months of observations to get things at this level of detail.

And more important, Rocky knows all about the local Petrova line.

As expected, it goes to one specific planet-probably the one that has the most carbon dioxide.

In this case, it's the third planet from the star, "Tau Ceti e."

At least, that's what Earth calls it.

So that'll be our first stop.

Sure, we could fly the Hail Mary through any part of the Petrova line and get some Astrophage that way.

But we'd only intersect the line for a few seconds.

A solar system is not a static thing.

We have to keep moving at least fast enough to maintain orbit around the star.

But Tau Ceti e is a nice, big planet in the widest part of the Petrova line.

We can park the Hail Mary in orbit and be immersed in local Astrophage for half of every orbit.

And we can stay there as long as we want, getting as much data as we need to about the Astrophage here and the dynamics of the Petrova line itself.

So we're on our way to the mysterious planet.

I can't just ask Mr.

Sulu to plot a course.

I spent two days doing math, checking my work, and rechecking my work before I figured out the exact angle and thrust to apply.

Sure, I have 20,000 kilograms of Astrophage left.

And yes, that's quite a lot of fuel considering I can get 1.5 g's by spending 6 grams per second.

And yes, Rocky's ship apparently has scads of Astrophage (I still don't understand how he has so much extra fuel).

But I'm conserving fuel anyway.

I got us going a good head of steam and we're on course for Tau Ceti e.

I'll do the orbital-insertion burn in about eleven days.

While we wait, we may as well have gravity.

So we're back to centrifuge mode.

Eleven days.

Truly astonishing.

The total distance we'll be traveling to get there is over 150 million kilometers.

That's about the same as the distance from Earth to the sun.

And we're doing it in eleven days.

How?

By having an absurd velocity.

I did three hours of thrust to get us going, and I'll do another three when we get to Tau Ceti e to slow down.

Right now, we're cruising along at 162 kilometers per second.

It's just ridiculous.

If you left Earth at that speed, you'd get to the moon in forty minutes.

This entire maneuver, including the burn I'll have to do to slow down at the end, will consume 130 kilograms of fuel.

Astrophage.

Crazy stuff.

Rocky stands in a bulb of clear xenonite in the floor of the control room.

"Boring name,"

Rocky says.

"What?

What name is boring?"

I ask.

He'd spent days building up the Eridian Zone throughout the ship.

He even installed his own new tunnels from deck to deck.

It's like having giant hamster Habitrails running everywhere.

He shifts his weight from one handhold to another.

"Tau Ceti e.

Boring name."

"Then give it a name."

"Me name?

No.

You name."

"You were here first."

I unclip my seatbelts and stretch out.

"You identified it.

You plotted its orbit and location.

You name it."

"This is you ship.

You name."

I shake my head.

"Earth-culture rule.

If you're at a place first, you get to name everything you discover there."

He thinks it over.

Xenonite is truly amazing.

Just a centimeter of transparent material separates my one-fifth atmosphere of oxygen pressure from Rocky's 29 atmospheres of ammonia.

Not to mention my 20 degrees Celsius from Rocky's 210 degrees Celsius.

He's taken over more of some rooms than others.

The dormitory is almost entirely his domain now.

I insisted he move all his crap into his compartment, so we agreed he could have most of the space in there.

He also put a large airlock in the dormitory.

He based it on the size of the Hail Mary's airlock on the assumption that anything important in the ship would likely be small enough to fit through that.

I can't ever go into his zone.

My EVA suit would never stand up to his environment.

I'd get squished like a grape.

The airlock is really so we can pass items back and forth.

The lab is mostly mine.

He has a tunnel leading up the side and another teeing off to run along the ceiling and ultimately through the ceiling into the control room.

He can observe any of the scientific stuff I do.

But in the end, Earth equipment wouldn't work in his environment, so it has to be in mine.

As for the control room...it's tight.

Rocky put the xenonite bulb in the floor next to the hatchway.

He really did try to keep the intrusion to a minimum.

He assures me the holes he added to my bulkheads won't affect the ship's structural integrity.

"Okay,"

he finally says.

"Name is ."

I don't need the frequency analyzer anymore.

That was an A- below-middle-C major fifth, followed by an E-flat octave, and then a G-minor seventh.

I enter it into my spreadsheet.

Though I don't know why.

I haven't had to look at that thing in days.

"What does it mean?"

"It is name of my mate."

I widen my eyes.

That little devil!

He never told me he had a mate!

I guess Eridians don't kiss and tell.

We'd covered some biological basics during our travels.

I explained how humans make more humans, and he told me where baby Eridians come from.

They're hermaphrodites and they reproduce by laying eggs next to each other.

Stuff happens between the eggs and one of them absorbs the other, leaving one viable egg that will hatch in one Eridian year-forty-two Earth days.

Laying eggs together is, basically, the Eridian equivalent of sex.

And they mate for life.

But this is the first I've heard of Rocky doing it.

"You have a mate?"

"Unknown,"

Rocky says.

"Mate possibly has new mate.

I gone a long time."

"Sad,"

I say.

"Yes, sad.

But necessary.

Must save Erid.

You pick human word for ."

Proper nouns are a headache.

If you're learning German from a guy named Hans, you just call him Hans.

But I literally can't make the noises Rocky makes and vice versa.

So when one of us tells the other about a name, the other one has to pick or invent a word to represent that name in their own language.

Rocky's actual name is a sequence of notes-he told it to me once but it has no meaning in his language, so I stuck with "Rocky."

But my name is actually an English word.

So Rocky just calls me the Eridian word for "grace."

Anyway, now I have to come up with an English word that means "Rocky's spouse."

"Adrian,"

I say.

Why not?

"Human word is 'Adrian.' "

"Understand,"

he says.

He heads down his tunnel into the lab.

I put my hands on my hips and crane my neck to watch him leave.

"Where are you going?"

"Eat."

"Eat?!

Wait!"

I've never seen him eat.

I've never even seen an orifice other than the radiator vents on top of his carapace.

How does he get food in?

For that matter, how does he lay eggs?

He's been pretty cagey about it.

He ate in his ship when we were connected.

And I think he snuck a few meals here and there while I slept.

I scamper down the ladder into the lab.

He's already halfway down his vertical tunnel, climbing the many handholds.

I keep up, climbing my own ladder.

"Hey, I want to watch!"

Rocky reaches the lab's floor and pauses.

"Is private.

I sleep after eat.

You watch me sleep, question?"

"I want to watch you eat!"

"Why, question?"

"Science,"

I say.

Rocky shifts his carapace left and right a few times.

Eridian body language for mild annoyance.

"Is biological.

Is gross."

"Science."

He wiggles his carapace again.

"Okay.

You watch."

He continues downward.

"Yes!"

I follow him down.

I squeeze into my little area of the dormitory.

All I have these days is my bed, the toilet, and the robot arms.

To be fair, he doesn't have much room either.

He has most of the volume, but it's laden with all his junk.

Plus, he made an ad- hoc workshop in there and a life-support system out of parts from his ship.

He opens one of his many soft-sided bags and pulls out a sealed package.

He tears it open with his claws and there are various shapes I can't identify.

Mostly rocky material like his smaller pieces with his claws.

"That's your food?"

I ask.

"Social discomfort,"

he says.

"No talk."

"Sorry."

I guess eating for them is something gross that is to be done in private.

He tears the rocky chunks off the food and exposes meat underneath.

It's definitely meat-it looks just like Earth meat.

Considering we are almost certainly descended from the same basic building blocks of life, I bet we use the same proteins and have the same general solutions to various evolutionary challenges.

Once again I'm struck by melancholy.

I want to spend the rest of my life studying Eridian biology!

But I have to save humanity first.

Stupid humanity.

Getting in the way of my hobbies.

He pulls all of the rocky chunks off the meat and sets that aside.

Then he tears the meat up into small chunks.

At all times, he keeps the food on the packaging it came in.

It never touches the floor.

I wouldn't want my food touching the floor either.

After a while, he has shredded the edible parts of his meal down as far as his hands can do it.

Far more than any human would with their food.

Then he steps over to the other side of his compartment, leaving his food where it was.

He pulls a flat, cylindrical container from a sealed box and places it under his thorax.

Then things...get gross.

He did warn me.

I can't complain.

The rocky armor on his abdomen splits and I see something fleshy rip open underneath.

A few drops of shiny silver liquid dribbles out.

Blood?

Then a gray blob plops out of his body into the pan.

It lands with a damp-sounding splat.

He seals the pan and puts it back in the box it came from.

He returns to the food and flips over onto his back.

The gaping abdominal hole is still open.

I can see inside.

There's soft-looking flesh in there.

He reaches over with a few of his hands and grabs some choice morsels of food.

He brings them to his opening and drops them in.

He repeats this process, slowly and methodically, until all the food is in his...mouth?

Stomach?

There is no chewing.

There are no teeth.

As far as I can tell, there are no moving parts inside.

He finishes the last of his meal, then lets his arms fall limp.

He lies spread-eagle on the floor, immobile.

I resist the urge to ask if he's okay.

I mean, he looks dead.

But this is probably just how Eridians eat.

And poop.

Yeah.

I'm guessing that blob that came out earlier was what's left of his previous meal.

He's a monostome-that is, the waste comes out the same opening that food goes into.

The opening in his abdomen closes slowly.

A scab-like material forms where the break in the skin was.

But I don't see it for long.

The rocky abdominal covering folds back into place shortly thereafter.

"I...sleep..."

he slurred.

"You...watch...question?"

A food coma for Rocky is no small thing.

This doesn't look voluntary at all.

This is a biologically enforced post-meal siesta.

"Yes, I watch.

Sleep."

"Sle...ee...p..."

he mumbles.

Then he conks out, still belly-up on the floor.

His breathing speeds up.

It always does when he first falls asleep.

His body has to dump all the heat in the hot circulatory system.

After a few minutes, he stops panting.

Now I know he's well and truly asleep.

Once he gets past the panting phase, I've never seen him wake back up in less than two hours.

I can sneak off to do my own thing.

In this case, I'll write down everything I just saw about his digestive cycle.

Step 1: Subject defecates from mouth.

"Yup,"

I say to myself.

"That was pretty freaking gross."

I wake up with Rocky staring at me.

It happens every morning now.

But it never stops being creepy.

How do I know that a pentagonally symmetrical creature with no eyes is "staring"

at me?

I just know.

Something in the body language.

"You awake,"

he says.

"Yeah."

I step out of bed and stretch.

"Food!"

The arms reach up and hand me a hot box.

I open it up and take a peek.

Looks like eggs and sausage.

"Coffee."

The arms dutifully hand me a cup of coffee.

It's kind of cool that the arms will hand me a cup when there's gravity, but a pouch when there isn't.

I'll remember this when writing up the Hail Mary's Yelp review.

I look to Rocky.

"You don't have to watch me sleep.

It's okay."

He turns his attention to a worktable in his partition of the dormitory.

"Eridian culture rule.

Must watch."

He picks up a device and tinkers with it.

Ah, the c-word.

"Culture."

We have an unspoken agreement that cultural things just have to be accepted.

It ends any minor dispute.

"Do it my way because it's how I was raised,"

basically.

We haven't run into anything where our cultures clash...yet.

I eat my breakfast and drink my coffee.

Rocky doesn't say anything to me during that time.

He never does.

Eridian courtesy.

"Trash,"

I say.

The arms collect my empty cup and meal package.

I head up to the control room and settle into the pilot's seat.

I bring up the telescope view on the main screen.

Planet Adrian sits in the center.

I've been watching it grow larger and larger for the past ten days.

The closer we get, the more I respect Rocky's astronomy skills.

All of his observations on its motion and mass have been spot-on.

Hopefully his gravity calculation is right too.

Or we'll have a very short and painful attempt to orbit.

Adrian is a pale-green planet with wispy white clouds in the upper atmosphere.

I can't see the ground at all.

Again, I'm amazed at the software that must have gone into this ship's computers.

We are spinning around as we hurtle through space.

But the image on-screen is rock solid.

"We're getting close,"

I say.

Rocky is two floors below me, but I speak at a normal volume.

I know he can hear it just fine.

"You know air yet, question?"

Rocky calls out.

Just as I know his hearing prowess, he knows my hearing limitations.

"I'll try again right now,"

I say.

I switch to the Spectrometer screen.

The Hail Mary has been incredibly reliable in almost every way, but you can't expect everything to work perfectly.

The spectrometer has been acting up.

I think it has something to do with the digitizer.

I've been trying it every day, and it keeps saying it can't get enough data to analyze.

I zero in on Adrian and give it another go.

The closer we get, the more reflected light we'll get, and maybe it'll be enough for the spectrometer to tell me what Adrian's atmosphere is made of.

...

...

...

.

"It worked!"

I say.

"Worked, question?!"

Rocky says, a full octave higher than normal.

He scampers up his tunnels to the control-room bulb.

"What is Adrian air, question?"

I read the results off the screen.

"Looks like it's...91 percent carbon dioxide, 7 percent methane, 1 percent argon, and the rest are trace gases.

It's a pretty thick atmosphere too.

Those are all clear gases, but I can't see the planet's surface."

"Normally you can see surface of planet from space, question?"

"If the atmosphere lets light through, yes."

"Human eyes are amazing organ.

Jealous."

"Well, not amazing enough.

I can't see Adrian's surface.

When air gets really thick, it stops letting light through.

Anyway, that's not important.

The methane-that's weird."

"Explain."

how is methane present?"

"Geology creates methane.

Carbon dioxide plus minerals plus water plus heat makes methane."

"Yes.

Possible,"

I say.

"But there's a lot of methane.

Eight percent of a very thick atmosphere.

Can geology make that much?"

"You have different theory, question?"

I rub the back of my neck.

"No.

Not really.

It is odd, though."

"Discrepancy is science.

You think about discrepancy.

Make theory.

You is science human."

"Yes.

I'll think about it."

"How long until orbit, question?"

I switch to the Navigation console.

We're right on course, and the orbital-insertion burn is scheduled for twenty-two hours from now.

"Just under one day,"

I say.

"Excitement,"

he says.

"Then we sample Astrophage at Adrian.

You ship sampler working well, question?"

"Yes,"

I say, with no way to know if I'm telling the truth.

There's no reason for Rocky to know I only vaguely understand the operation of my own ship.

I flip through the science instruments until I land on the controls for the External Collection Unit.

I look at the diagram on the screen.

It's simple enough.

The sampler is a rectangular box.

When activated, it will pivot up to be perpendicular to the hull.

Then, doors on both sides of the rectangle will open up.

Inside, there's a bunch of sticky resin-ready to catch anything that flies in.

That's it.

Flypaper.

Fancy space flypaper, but just flypaper.

"After collection, how sample enter ship, question?"

Simple doesn't mean convenient.

As far as I can tell, there's no automated system to do anything with the sample.

"I have to go get it."

"Humans are amaze.

You leave ship."

"Yeah, I guess."

Eridians never bothered to invent spacesuits.

Why would they?

Space is devoid of sensory input to them.

It would be like a human with scuba gear diving into an ocean of black paint.

There's just no reason to do it.

Eridians use hull robots for EVA work.

The Hail Mary doesn't have one of those, so any EVA work has to be done by me.

"Amaze is wrong word,"

he says.

"Amaze is compliment.

Better word is ."

"What's that mean?"

"It is when person not act normal.

Danger to self."

"Ah,"

I say, adding the new chord into my language database.

"Crazy.

My word for that is 'crazy.' "

"Crazy.

Humans are crazy."

I shrug.

- "Gosh darn it!"

I said.

"Language!"

came the voice over the radio.

"Seriously, though, what happened?"

The sample vial fell gently away from my hand to the bottom of the pool.

It took several seconds to fall 3 feet but, wearing this EVA suit at the bottom of the world's largest swimming pool, I had no chance of reaching out to grab it.

"I dropped vial number three."

"Okay,"

said Forrester.

"That's three vials so far.

We're going to have to work on the clamper tool."

"Might not be the tool.

Might just be me."

The tool in my awkwardly gloved hand was far from perfect, but still pretty ingenious.

It turned the clumsy pawing of an EVA suit glove into fine manipulation at the other end.

All I had to do was squeeze a trigger with my index finger and the clamp constricted by 2 millimeters.

If I squeezed a different trigger with my middle finger, it would rotate up to 90 degrees clockwise.

My ring and pinkie fingers made it tilt forward up to 90 degrees.

"Stand by, I'm checking the video,"

said Forrester.

NASA's Neutral Buoyancy Lab at Johnson Space Center was a marvel of engineering in itself.

The gigantic swimming pool was large enough to fit a full-size replica of the International Space Station inside.

They used it to train astronauts on zero-g maneuvering while in EVA suits.

After countless meetings (that I was unfortunately forced to attend), the microbiology community convinced Stratt the mission needed custom-designed tools.

She agreed, on the condition that none of them be mission-critical.

She was resolute on having all the important stuff be off-the-shelf products with millions of hours of consumer testing.

And, being her little science lapdog, it fell to me to test out the IVME kit.

IVME was an acronym that stood for four words God never intended to be together: "in vacuo microbiology equipment."

Astrophage lives in space.

We could study them on Earth in our atmosphere all we wanted, but we wouldn't get the full picture of how they worked until we studied them in vacuum and in zero g.

The crew of the Hail Mary would need these tools.

I stood in one corner of the NBL, the imposing figure of ISS behind me.

Two scuba divers floated nearby, ready to rescue me in the event of an emergency.

NASA had sunk a metal lab table into the pool for me.

The biggest problem wasn't making equipment that worked in vacuum-though they did have to completely redesign pipettes because there's no suction force in space.

The problem was the ham-fisted EVA gloves the user had to wear.

Astrophage may like vacuum, but human bodies certainly don't.

But hey, at least I was learning a lot about how Russian EVA suits worked.

Yes, Russian.

Not American.

Stratt listened to several experts and they all agreed the Russian Orlan EVA suit was the safest and most reliable.

So that's what the mission would use.

"Okay, I see what happened,"

said Forrester through the headset.

"You told the clamp to tilt yaw, but it released instead.

The internal microcable wires must be tangled up.

I'll be right there.

Can you surface and bring the clamp with you?"

"Sure thing."

I waved to the two divers and pointed upward.

They nodded and helped me to the surface.

I got hoisted out of the pool by a crane assembly and placed on the deck nearby.

Several techs came forward and helped me out of the suit.

Though it was pretty easy-I just stepped out the back panel.

Got to love chrysalis suits.

Forrester came from the control room next door and collected the tool.

"I'll make some changes and we can try again in a couple of hours.

I got a call while you were in the pool; you're needed in Building 30.

Shapiro and DuBois have a couple-hour break while they reset the flight-control simulators.

No rest for the wicked.

Stratt wants you over there training them on Astrophage."

"Copy that, Houston,"

I said.

The world might have been ending, but being at NASA's main campus was too awesome for me not to be excited.

I left the NBL and walked to Building 30.

They would have sent a car if I'd asked, but I didn't want one.

It was only a ten- minute walk.

Besides, I loved walking around in my country's space history.

I walked in, through security, and onward to a small conference room they'd set up.

Martin DuBois, in his blue flight uniform, stood and shook my hand.

"Dr.

Grace.

Good to see you again."

His meticulous paperwork and notes were arrayed in front of him.

Annie Shapiro's sloppy notes and wadded papers lay strewn on the table next to him, but her seat was empty.

"Where's Annie?"

I asked.

He sat back down.

Even while seated, he kept a firm, perfect posture.

"She had to use the facilities.

She should be back shortly."

I sat down and opened my backpack.

"You know, you can call me Ryland.

We're all PhDs here.

I think first names are fine."

"I'm sorry, Dr.

Grace.

That is not how I was raised.

However, you may call me Martin if you wish."

"Thanks."

I pulled out my laptop and fired it up.

"How have you been lately?"

"I have been well, thank you.

Dr.

Shapiro and I have begun a sexual relationship."

I paused.

"Um.

Okay."

"I thought it prudent to inform you."

He opened his notebook and set a pen beside it.

"There should be no secrets within the core mission group."

"Sure, sure,"

I said.

"I mean.

It shouldn't be a problem.

You're the primary science position and Annie's the alternate.

There's no scenario where you would both be on the mission.

But...I mean...your relationship..."

"Yes, you are correct,"

DuBois said.

"I will be setting out on a suicide mission in under a year.

And if for some reason I am deemed unfit or unable, she will go on the suicide mission.

We are aware of this, and we know this relationship can only end in death."

"We live in bleak times,"

I said.

He folded his hands in front of him.

"Dr.

Shapiro and I do not see it that way.

We are enjoying very active sexual encounters."

"Yeah, okay, I don't need to know-"

"No need for condoms either.

She is on birth control and we have both had extremely thorough medical examinations as part of the program."

I typed on my computer, hoping he'd change the subject.

"It's quite pleasurable."

"I'm sure it is."

"In any event, I thought you should know."

"Yeah, no, sure."

The door opened, and Annie trotted in.

"Sorry!

Sorry!

I had to pee.

Like...so bad,"

said the world's smartest and most accomplished microbiologist.

"My back teeth were floating!"

"Welcome back, Dr.

Shapiro.

I've told Dr.

Grace about our sexual relationship."

I put my head in my hands.

"Cool,"

said Annie.

"Yeah, we've got nothing to hide."

"In any event,"

said DuBois, "if I remember the previous lesson correctly, we were working on the cellular biology within Astrophage mitochondria."

I cleared my throat.

"Yes.

Today I'll be talking about the Astrophage's Krebs cycle.

It's identical to what we find in Earth mitochondria, but with one additional step-"

Annie held up her hand.

"Oh, sorry.

One more thing-"

She turned to DuBois.

"Martin, we have about fifteen minutes of personal time after this lesson and before our next training exercise.

Want to meet up in the bathroom down the hall and have sex?"

"I find that agreeable,"

said DuBois.

"Thank you, Dr.

Shapiro."

"Okay, cool."

They both looked to me, ready for their lesson.

I waited a few seconds to make sure there was no more oversharing, but they seemed content.

"Okay, so the Krebs cycle in Astrophage has a variant-wait.

Do you call her Dr.

Shapiro while having sex?"

"Of course.

That's her name."

"I kind of like it,"

she said.

"I'm sorry I asked,"

I said.

"Now, the Krebs cycle..."

- Rocky's data about Planet Adrian was dead-on.

It's 3.93 times Earth's mass and has a radius of 10,318 kilometers (almost double Earth's).

It's plugging along around Tau Ceti with an average orbital velocity of 35.9 kilometers per second.

Plus, he had the position of the planet correct to within 0.00001 percent.

That data was all I needed to work out the insertion thrust needed.

It's a good thing those numbers were right.

If they hadn't been, there would have been some serious scrambling when the orbital insertion went wrong.

Maybe even some dying.

Of course, to use the spin drives at all, I had to take us out of centrifuge mode.

Rocky and I float in the control room, he in his ceiling bulb and me in the pilot's seat.

I watch the camera-feed screen with a stupid grin on my face.

I'm at another planet!

I shouldn't be this excited.

I've been at another star for the past several weeks.

But that's kind of esoteric.

Tau Ceti is pretty much like the sun.

It's bright, you can't get too close to it, and it even emits the same general range of frequencies.

For some reason, being at a new planet is much more exciting.

The wispy clouds of Adrian coast by beneath us.

Or, more accurately, the wispy clouds barely move at all and we zoom by overhead.

Adrian has a higher gravity than Earth, so our orbital velocity is just over 12 kilometers per second-far more than what's needed to orbit Earth.

The pale-green planet that I've been watching for eleven days has a lot more detail now that we're on top of it.

It's not just green.

There are dark and light bands of green wrapping around it.

Just like Jupiter and Saturn.

But unlike those two gas-giant leviathans, Adrian is a rocky world.

Thanks to Rocky's notes, we know the radius and mass, which means we know its density.

And it's far too dense to be just gas.

There's a surface down there, I just can't see it.

Man, what I wouldn't give for a lander!

Realistically, it wouldn't do me any good.

Even if I had some way of landing on Adrian, the atmosphere would crush me dead.

It'd be like landing on Venus.

Or Erid, for that matter.

Heck, in that case, I wish Rocky had a lander.

The pressure down there might not be too much for an Eridian.

Speaking of Erid, Rocky's calibrating some kind of device in his control-room bubble.

It looks almost like a gun.

I don't think we've started a space war, so I assume it's something else.

He holds the device with one hand, taps it with another, and uses two more to hold a rectangular panel that is connected to the device by a short cable.

He uses his remaining hand to anchor himself at a handhold.

He makes some more adjustments to the device with what looks like a screwdriver, and suddenly the panel springs to life.

It was completely flat, but now has a texture to it.

He waves the and right.

"Success!

It functions!"

I lean over the edge of the pilot's seat for a better look.

"What's that?"

"Wait."

He points the gun part at my external camera readout screen.

He adjusts a couple of controls and the pattern on the rectangle settles into a circle.

Looking closer, I see some parts of the circle are a little more raised than others.

It looks like a relief map.

"This device hear light.

Like human eye."

"Oh.

It's a camera."

"

,"

he says quickly.

Now we have "camera"

in our vocabulary.

"It analyze light and show as texture."

"Oh, and you can sense that texture?"

I say.

"Cool."

"Thank."

He attaches the camera to the bulb wall and fixes its angle to point at my central screen.

"What are wavelengths of light humans can see, question?"

"All wavelengths between 380 nanometers and 740 nanometers."

Most people don't just know that off the top of their head.

But most people aren't junior high schoolteachers who have giant charts of the visible spectrum on their classroom walls.

"Understand,"

he says.

He turns a few knobs on his device.

"Now I 'see' what you see."

"You're an amazing engineer."

He waves a claw dismissively.

"No.

Camera is old technology.

Display is old technology.

Both were on my ship for science.

I only modify to use inside."

I think Eridians have a lot of modesty in their culture.

Either that, or Rocky is one of those people who just can't take a compliment.

He points to the circle on his display.

"This is Adrian, question?"

I check the exact region of Adrian he's pointing at, then "I not have word for this."

Of course the Eridian language has no words for colors.

Why would it?

I never thought of colors as a mysterious thing.

But if you've never heard of them before, I guess they're pretty weird.

We have names for frequency ranges in the electromagnetic spectrum.

Then again, my students all have eyes and they were still amazed when I told them "x-rays,"

"microwaves,"

"Wi-Fi,"

and "purple"

were all just wavelengths of light.

"You name it then,"

I say.

"Yes yes.

I name this color: middle-rough.

My display pattern is smooth for high-frequency light.

Rough for low-frequency light.

This color is middle-rough."

"Understand,"

I say.

"And yes, green is right in the middle of the wavelengths humans can see."

"Good good,"

he says.

"Is sample ready, question?"

We've been in orbit for about a day now and I activated the sampler right when we got here.

I flip to the External Collection Unit screen.

It reads as fully functional and even reports how long it's been open: 21 hours and 17 minutes.

"Yeah, I guess so."

"You get."

"Ugh,"

I groan.

"EVAs are so much work!"

"Lazy human.

Go get!"

I laugh.

He has a slightly different tone when he's joking around.

It took a long time for me to identify.

It's like...it's in the timing between words.

They don't have the same cadence.

I can't really put my finger on it, but I know when I hear it.

From the External Collection Unit screen, I order the sampler to close its doors and return to its flat configuration.

The panel reports that it's been done, and I confirm it with hull cameras.

I climb into the Orlan EVA suit, enter the airlock, and cycle it.

Adrian is absolutely gorgeous in person.

I stay out on the hull staring at the huge world for several minutes.

Bands of dark and light green cover the orb, and the reflected glow from Tau Ceti is simply breathtaking.

I could stare at it for hours.

I probably got to do this with Earth too.

I wish I could remember.

Man, I really wish I could remember that.

It must have been every bit as beautiful.

"You out long time,"

comes Rocky's voice through the headset.

"You are safe, question?"

I set up the EVA panel to always play my radio feed over speakers in the control room.

Plus, I taped a headset microphone to Rocky's control-room bulb and set it to be voice- activated.

All he has to do is talk and it broadcasts.

"I'm looking at Adrian.

It's pretty."

"Look later.

Get sample now."

"You're pushy."

"Yes."

I climb along the hull, bathed in Adrian-light.

Everything has a light-green tinge to it.

I find the sample collector right where it's supposed to be.

It's not as big as I expected.

It's a half-meter square or so.

There's a lever beside it with red and yellow stripes all around it.

Text on the lever reads -    ECU-.

I clip a tether to a convenient hole on the unit (presumably put there for this exact use), and pull the lever over to the open position.

The sampler floats free of the hull.

I work my way back across the hull to the airlock with the sampler in tow.

I cycle my way back in and climb out of the suit.

"All is good, question?"

Rocky asks.

"Yes."

"Good!"

Rocky says.

"You inspect with science gear, question?"

"Yes.

Now."

I bring up the Centrifuge panel.

"Prepare for gravity."

"Yes, gravity."

He grips handholds with three of his claws.

"For science gear."

Once the centrifuge spins up, I get to work in the lab.

Rocky scurries into his tunnel in the lab ceiling and watches intently.

Well, not "watches."

Listens intently, I guess.

I lay the sampler on the lab table and open one of the panels.

This is the side that faced Tau Ceti.

I smile at what I see.

I crane my head to look up at Rocky.

"This panel was white when we started; now it's black."

"Not understand."

"The sampler's color changed to the color of Astrophage.

We got a lot of Astrophage."

"Good good!"

Over the next two hours, I scrape everything off of both halves of the sampler, putting each group in their own containers.

Then I give each sample a good rinse with water and let the Astrophage settle to the bottom.

I'm sure a lot of that sticky substance came with the Astrophage when I scraped it off, and I want it gone.

I perform a series of tests.

First I run a few Astrophage through DNA-marker testing to see if they are identical to the Astrophage found at Earth.

They are-at least, the markers I checked are identical.

Then I check overall population of each sample.

"Interesting,"

I say.

Rocky perks up.

"What is interesting, question?"

"Both halves had approximately the same population."

"Not expected,"

he says.

"Not expected,"

I agree.

One side of the sampler pointed toward Tau Ceti, while the other pointed toward Adrian.

Astrophage migrate to breed.

For every frisky Astrophage that heads to Adrian with a twinkle in its eye, two should return.

So, broadly speaking, there should be twice as many Astrophage going from Adrian to Tau Ceti as there are going the other direction.

But that's not what's happening.

The outgoing population is the same as the incoming population.

Rocky climbs along the tunnel that runs across the roof of the lab to get a better look.

"Flaw in counting, question?

How you count, question?"

"I measure total heat energy output of both samples."

It's a surefire way to know how much Astrophage you're dealing with.

Each one insists on being 96.415 degrees Celsius.

The more of them there are, the more total heat will be absorbed by the metal plate I put them on.

He taps two claws together.

"That is good method.

Population must be same.

How, question?"

"I don't know."

I smear some of the "returning"

Astrophage (that is, the Astrophage that was on the way from Adrian to Tau Ceti) onto a slide.

I take it to a microscope.

Rocky scampers along his tunnel to keep up.

"That is what, question?"

"Microscope,"

I say.

"It helps me see very small things.

I can see Astrophage with this."

"Amaze."

I take a look at the sample and gasp.

There's a lot more than just Astrophage in there!

The familiar black dots of Astrophage are all over the sample.

But so are translucent cells, smaller bacteria-looking things, and larger amoeba-like things.

There are thin things, fat things, spiral things...too many to count.

Too many different kinds of things to count.

It's like looking at all the life in a drop of lake water!

"Wow!"

I say.

"Life!

There's a whole bunch of life in here!

Not just Astrophage.

A bunch of different species!"

Rocky literally bounces off the tunnel walls.

"Amaze!

Amaze amaze amaze!"

"Adrian isn't just a planet,"

I say.

"Adrian is a planet with life, like Earth or Erid!

That explains where the methane comes from.

Life makes methane!"

Rocky freezes.

Then he shoots bolt-upright.

I've never seen him raise his carapace so high.

"Life is also reason for population discrepancy!

Life is reason!"

"What?"

I say.

He's more excited than I've ever seen him.

"How?

I don't understand."

He taps the tunnel wall with his claw, pointing at my microscope.

"Some life on Adrian EATS Astrophage!

Population in balance.

Natural order.

This explains all things!"

"Oh my God!"

I gasp.

My heart just about beats out of my chest.

"Astrophage has a predator!"

There's a whole biosphere at Adrian.

Not just Astrophage.

There's even an active biosphere within the Petrova line.

This is where it all started.

Has to be.

How else can we explain countless extremely different life-forms that all evolved to migrate in space?

They all came from the same genetic root.

Astrophage was just one of many, many life-forms that evolved here.

And with all life, there is variance and predation.

Adrian isn't just some planet that Astrophage infected.

It's the Astrophage homeworld!

And it's the home of Astrophage's predators.

"This is amazing!"

I yell.

"If we find a predator..."

"We take home!"

Rocky says, two octaves higher than normal.

"It eat Astrophage, breed, eat more Astrophage, breed, eat more more more!

Stars saved!"

"Yes!"

I press my knuckles against the tunnel wall.

"Fist- bump!"

"What, question?"

I rap the tunnel again.

"This.

Do this."

He emulates my gesture against the wall opposite my hand.

"Celebration!"

I say.

"Celebration!"

T he crew of the Hail Mary sat on the couch in the break room, each with their drink of choice.

Commander Yo had a German beer, Engineer Ilyukhina had a distressingly large tumbler of vodka, and Science Specialist DuBois had a glass of 2003 Cabernet Sauvignon that he had poured ten minutes in advance to ensure it had time to breathe.

The break room itself had been a struggle to arrange.

Stratt didn't like anything that wasn't directly related to the mission, and an aircraft carrier wasn't exactly overflowing with extra space.

Still, with more than a hundred scientists from all over the world demanding a place to relax, she had relented.

A small room in the corner of the hangar deck was built to house the "extravagance."

Dozens of people crowded into the room and watched the TV feed on the wall-mounted monitor.

By silent agreement, the crew got to sit on the couch.

The crew got all possible perks and privileges.

They were sacrificing their lives for humanity.

The least we could do was give them the best seats.

"And we're just minutes away from lift-off,"

said the BBC reporter.

We could have watched American news, Chinese news, Russian news, it would have all been the same.

The long shot of Baikonur Cosmodrome interspersed with shots of the huge launch vehicle on the pad.

The reporter stood in the observation room overlooking Moscow's Mission Control Center.

"Today's launch is the ninth in a total of sixteen total launches for Project Hail Mary, but it is arguably the most important one.

This payload contains the cockpit, lab, and dormitory modules.

Astronauts on ISS are ready to receive the modules and will spend the next two weeks positioning them on the Hail Mary's frame, which was built over the last several expeditions..."

Ilyukhina raised her vodka.

"Do not fuck up my house, Roscosmos bastards!"

"Aren't they your friends?"

I asked.

"They can be both!"

She bellowed with laughter.

The countdown came on-screen.

Less than a minute to go.

Yo leaned forward and peered intently.

It must have been hard-a military man of action forced to passively watch something so important play out.

DuBois saw Yo's expression.

"I'm certain the launch will go well, Commander Yo."

"Mm,"

said Yo.

"Thirty seconds to launch,"

said Ilyukhina.

"I cannot wait that long."

She downed her vodka and immediately poured herself another glass.

The assembled scientists pressed forward a bit as the countdown continued.

I found myself pinned against the back of the couch.

But I was too focused on the screen to care.

DuBois craned his neck to look back at me.

"Will Ms.

Stratt not be joining us?"

"I don't think so,"

I said.

"She doesn't care about fun stuff like launches.

She's probably going over spreadsheets in her office or something."

He nodded.

"Then it's fortunate that we have you here.

To represent her, in a way."

"Me?

Represent her?

How did you get that idea?"

Ilyukhina spun her head to face me.

"You are number two, no?

You are first officer of Project Hail Mary?"

"What?

No!

I'm just one of the scientists.

Like all these guys."

I gestured to the men and women behind me.

Ilyukhina and DuBois looked at each other and then back to me.

"You honestly think this?"

she said.

Bob Redell spoke up behind me.

"You're not like the rest of us, Grace."

I shrugged at him.

"Of course I am.

Why wouldn't I be?"

"The point is,"

DuBois said, "you are, somehow, special to Ms.

Stratt.

I had assumed you two were engaged in sexual congress."

My mouth fell agape.

"Wha-what?!

Are you out of your mind?!

No!

No way!"

"Huh,"

said Ilyukhina.

"Perhaps you should be?

She is uptight.

She could use good roll in hay."

"Oh my God.

Is that what people think?"

I turned to face the scientists.

Most of them averted their eyes.

"Nothing like that is going on!

And I'm not her number two!

I'm just a scientist- drafted into this project like the rest of you!"

Yo turned around and stared at me for a moment.

The room fell silent.

He didn't speak much, so when he did, people paid attention.

"You are the number two,"

he said.

Then he turned back to the screen.

The BBC announcer counted the last few seconds along with the on-screen timer.

"Three...two...one...and we have lift-off!"

Flames and smoke surrounded the rocket on-screen, and it rose skyward.

Slow at first, then picking up more and more speed.

Ilyukhina held her glass up for a few seconds and finally burst into cheers.

"Tower is clear!

Launch is good!"

She gulped her vodka.

"It's only a hundred feet off the ground,"

I said.

"Maybe wait till it reaches orbit?"

DuBois sipped his wine.

"Astronauts celebrate when the tower is clear."

Without a word, Yo took a sip of his beer.

- "Why.

Doesn't.

This.

Work?!"

I hit my forehead with both palms at each word.

I flop into the lab chair, deflated.

Rocky watches from his tunnel above.

"No predator, question?"

"No predator."

I sigh.

The experiment is simple enough.

It's a glass bulb full of Adrian's air.

The air didn't actually come from Adrian, but the proportions of gases are based on the spectrograph of its atmosphere.

The pressure is very low-one-tenth atmosphere, like the upper atmosphere of Adrian must be.

Also inside the bulb is our collected Adrian life-forms and some fresh Astrophage.

I hoped that providing a bunch of nice, juicy Astrophage would make the predator population spike and I could isolate it from the sample once it was the dominant cell type present.

Didn't work.

"You are certain, question?"

I check my makeshift heat-energy indicator.

It's just a thermocouple with part of it sticking in ice water and part of it attached to the bulb.

Heat energy is provided by Astrophage and consumed by the ice.

The resulting temperature of the thermocouple tells me how much total heat energy the Astrophage is giving off.

If the temperature goes down, it means the Astrophage population went down.

But that's not happening.

"Yeah, I'm sure,"

I say.

"No change in Astrophage population."

"Maybe temperature of bulb no good.

Too hot.

Adrian upper atmosphere is probably much colder than you room temperature."

I shake my head.

"Adrian air temperature shouldn't matter.

The predator has to be able to handle Astrophage temperature."

"Ah.

Yes.

You are right."

"Maybe the predator theory is wrong,"

I say.

He clicks across the tunnel to the far side of the lab.

He paces when he thinks.

Interesting that humans and Eridians would both have that behavior.

"Predators is only explanation.

Maybe predators no live in Petrova line.

Maybe predators live further down in atmosphere."

I perk up.

"Maybe."

I look over to the lab monitor.

I have it showing the external camera view of Adrian.

Not for any scientific reason-just because it looks cool.

Right this moment we're about to cross the terminator into the day side of the planet.

The light of orbital dawn glows along an arc.

"Okay, let's say the predator lives in the atmosphere.

What altitude?"

"What altitude is best, question?

If you predator, where you go, question?

You go to Astrophage."

"Okay, so what altitude are the Astrophage at?"

The question answers itself.

"Ah!

There's a breeding altitude.

Where air has enough carbon dioxide for Astrophage to breed."

"Yes!"

He clatters back up his tunnel and stands above me.

"We can find.

Easy.

Use Petrovascope."

I slam my fist into my palm.

"Yes!

Of course!"

Astrophage have to breed somewhere.

Some partial pressure of carbon dioxide will be key.

But we don't have to work that out or take any guesses.

When an Astrophage divides, it and its offspring head back to Tau Ceti.

And they use IR-light emission to make it happen.

That means there will be a glow of Petrova- frequency light coming from all over the planet at that specific altitude.

"To the control room!"

I say.

"Control room!"

He scampers across the lab ceiling tunnel and disappears through his personal control-room entrance.

I follow along beside but I'm not quite as fast.

I climb up the ladder, take the pilot's seat, and flip on the Petrovascope.

Rocky has already taken up position in his bulb and points his camera at my main screen.

The entire screen glows red.

"What is this, question?

No data."

"Wait,"

I say.

I bring up the controls and options and start moving sliders.

"We're inside the Petrova line.

There's Astrophage all around us.

Let me just change the setting to only show the brightest sources...."

It takes a lot of manipulation, but I finally manage to get the brightness range set.

What I'm left with are irregular blotchy areas of IR light coming from Adrian.

"I think this is our answer,"

I say.

Rocky gets closer to his textured screen to "see"

what I'm looking at.

"Not what I expected,"

I say.

I thought it would just be a general layer of IR glow at a given altitude.

But it's nothing like that.

The clumps are basically clouds.

And they don't match up with the wispy white clouds I can see with visible light.

These are, for lack of a better term, IR clouds.

Or, more accurately, clouds of Astrophage that are emitting IR.

For whatever reason, Astrophage breed much more in some areas than others.

"Unusual distribution,"

says Rocky, echoing my own thoughts.

"Yes.

Maybe the weather affects breeding?"

"Maybe.

Can you calculate altitude, question?"

"Yes.

Wait."

I zoom and pan the Petrovascope until I'm looking at an Astrophage cloud right on the horizon of Adrian.

The readouts show the camera's current angle with respect to the axes of the ship.

I jot those angles down and switch to the navigation console.

It tells me the angle of the ship relative to the center of our orbit.

With that information, and a whole bunch of trigonometry, I can work out the altitude of the Astrophage clouds.

"The breeding altitude is 91.2 kilometers from the surface.

The width is less than 200 meters."

Rocky folds one of his claws over the other.

I know that body language.

He's thinking.

"If predators exist, predators are there."

"Agreed,"

I say.

"But how do we get a sample?"

"How close can orbit get, question?"

"One hundred kilometers from the planet.

Any closer and the ship will burn up in the atmosphere."

"This is unfortunate,"

Rocky says.

"Eight point eight kilometers away from breeding zone.

No can get closer, question?"

"If we hit the atmosphere at orbital speed, we die.

But what if we slow down?"

"Slow down means orbit no good.

Fall into air.

Die."

I lean over the armrest to look at him.

"We can use the engines to keep from falling into the atmosphere.

Just thrust constantly away from the planet.

Lower ourselves into the atmosphere, get a sample, and then leave."

"No work.

We die."

"Why no work?"

"Engines give off enormous IR light.

If you use in air, air become ions.

Explosion.

Destroy ship."

I wince.

"Right, of course."

Back when Dimitri first tested a spin drive, it was only on for 100 microseconds and it melted a metric ton of metallic silicon behind it.

And that test drive was one-thousandth the power of the Hail Mary's engines.

Everything works fine when I'm in a vacuum.

But using the engines in air would create a fireball that makes a nuclear bomb look like a firecracker.

We sit in frustrated silence for a while.

The salvation of both our worlds might be just 10 kilometers below us, and we can't get to it.

There has to be a way.

But how?

We don't even need to be there.

We just need to get a sample of the air there.

Anything, no matter how small.

Wait a minute.

"How do you make xenonite again?

You mix two liquids?"

Rocky is caught off guard by the question, but he answers.

"Yes.

Have liquid and liquid.

Mix.

They become xenonite."

"How much can you make?

How much of those liquids did you bring?"

"I bring much.

I use to make my zone."

I bring up a spreadsheet and start typing in numbers.

"We need 0.4 cubic meters of xenonite.

Can you make that much?"

"Yes,"

he says.

"Have enough liquids remain to make 0.61 cubic meters."

"Okay.

Then I have...an idea."

I steeple my fingers.

- It's a simple idea, but also stupid.

Thing is, when stupid ideas work, they become genius ideas.

We'll see which way this one falls.

The Astrophage breeding grounds are 10 kilometers into the atmosphere of Adrian.

I can't fly the Hail Mary that low because the air is too thick and I'd burn up.

I can't use the engines in the atmosphere because then all heck breaks loose and everything blows up.

So, it's time to go fishing.

We're going to make a 10- kilometer-long chain, put a sampling device of some kind on the end (Rocky will make that), and drag it through the atmosphere.

Easy enough, right?

Wrong.

The Hail Mary has to maintain a velocity of 12.6 kilometers per second to stay in orbit.

Any slower and we'll decay and burn up.

But if we drag a chain through the air at that velocity-even a xenonite chain-it'll get torn up and vaporized.

So we have to go slower.

But going slower means falling toward the planet.

Unless I use the engines to constantly maintain altitude.

But if I do that, I'd be thrusting directly away from the chain and sample device.

The exhaust from the engines will vaporize all of it.

So we'll thrust at an angle.

Simple as that.

It'll look absolutely ridiculous.

The Hail Mary will be tilted to 30 degrees from vertical, thrusting upward at that angle.

Below it, the chain will dangle 10 kilometers into the air straight down.

The atmosphere behind the thrusters will be in a constant state of ionized fire.

It should be quite a show.

But it'll be behind us and the chain will be passing through unaffected air.

All told, our lateral velocity will be just over 100 meters per second.

The chain can handle that speed in the thin high-altitude air, no problem.

I calculated that it'll only deflect about 2 degrees from vertical.

Once we feel like we have a sample, we skedaddle.

What could possibly go wrong!

I say that ironically.

I'm not the greatest 3-D modeler, but I'm able to make a chain link in CAD reasonably well.

It's not a normal oval link, though.

It's mostly oval, but with a thin opening for another link to enter.

Easy to assemble the links, but extremely unlikely for them to rattle apart.

Especially when they're under tension.

I grab a block of aluminum and mount it in the mill.

"This will work, question?"

Rocky asks from his ceiling tunnel.

"It should,"

I say.

I fire up the mill and it gets right to work.

It drills out the mold for a chain link exactly the way I'd hoped.

I pull the workpiece out, dust off the aluminum shavings, and hold it up to the tunnel.

"How's this?"

"Very good!"

Rocky says.

"We will need many many many chain links.

More molds means I can make more at one time.

You can make many molds, question?"

"Well."

I look in the supply cabinet.

"I have limited amounts of aluminum."

"You have many items in ship you no use.

Two beds in dormitory, for instance.

Melt them, make blocks, make more molds."

"Wow.

You don't do anything by half-measure, do you?"

"No understand."

"I'm not going to melt a bunch of stuff.

How would I even do that?"

"Astrophage.

Melt anything."

"You got me there,"

I say.

"But no.

The heat would be too much for my life-support system to handle.

That reminds me.

Why do you have so much extra Astrophage?"

He pauses.

"Strange story."

I perk up.

Always up for a strange story.

He clicks along his tunnel and sits in a slightly wider section.

"Science Eridians do much math.

Calculate trip.

More fuel mean faster trip.

So we make much much much Astrophage."

"How'd you make so much?

Earth had a very difficult time making it."

"Was easy.

Put in metal balls with carbon dioxide.

Put in ocean.

Wait.

Astrophage double, double, double.

Much Astrophage."

"Riiight.

Because your oceans are hotter than Astrophage."

"Yes.

Earth oceans are not.

Sad."

When it comes to Astrophage manufacturing, Erid was born on third base.

The whole planet is a pressure cooker.

Twenty- nine atmospheres at 210 degrees Celsius means water is liquid on the surface.

And their oceans are far, far hotter than the Astrophage critical temperature.

They just put Astrophage in the water, let it absorb heat, and breed.

I'm jealous.

We had to pave the Sahara Desert to breed up our Astrophage.

All they had to do was throw it in the water.

The stored heat energy of Erid's oceans is ridiculous.

A whole bunch of water-multiples of Earth's total oceans-holding a temperature around 200 degrees Celsius or more.

That's a lot of energy.

And that's why they can take a century or so to solve the problem while Earth is going to freeze in a few decades.

It's not just their air storing heat.

Their oceans store even more.

Born on third base.

Again.

"Science Eridians design ship and fuel requirements.

Journey to take 6.64 years."

That trips me up for a moment.

40 Eridani is ten light-years away from Tau Ceti, so you can't get from one to the other in less than ten years from Erid's point of view.

He must mean 6.64 years of time experienced by his ship thanks to time dilation.

"Strange things happen on trip.

Crew sick.

Die."

His voice lowers.

"Now I know was radiation."

I look down and give him a moment.

"Everyone sick.

I alone to run ship.

More strange things happen.

Engines not work right.

I am engine expert.

I cannot figure out problem."

"Your engines failed?"

"No.

Not fail.

Thrust normal.

But speed...not increase.

No can explain."

"Huh."

He clatters back and forth as he talks.

"Then more strange: Reach halfway point earlier than should.

Much earlier.

I turn ship around.

Thrust to slow down.

But Tau get farther away.

How?

Still moving toward Tau but Tau moving away.

Much confusion."

"Uh-oh,"

I say.

A thought creeps into my head.

A very disturbing thought.

"I speed up.

Slow down.

Much confuse.

But get here.

Even with all mistakes and confusion, I get here in three years.

Half of time science Eridian say should be.

So much confuse."

"Oh...oh my..."

I mumble.

"Much much much fuel remain.

Much more than should have.

No complain.

But confuse."

"Yeah..."

I say.

"Tell me this: Is time on Erid the same as time on your ship?"

He cocks his carapace.

"Question make no sense.

Of course time is same.

Time is same everywhere."

I put my head in my hands.

"Oh boy."

Eridians don't know about relativistic physics.

They calculated their entire journey with Newtonian physics.

They worked it all out by assuming they could just accelerate faster and faster and the speed of light wasn't an issue.

They don't know about time dilation.

Rocky doesn't realize that Erid experienced a whole bunch more time than he did on that trip.

They don't know about length dilation.

The distance to Tau Ceti will actually increase as you slow down relative to it- even if you're still going toward it.

An entire planet of intelligent people put together a ship based on incorrect scientific assumptions, and by some miracle, the sole survivor of the crew was clever enough at trial-and- error problem solving to actually get it to its destination.

And out of that major screw-up comes my salvation.

They thought they'd need a whole lot more fuel.

So Rocky has boatloads to spare.

"Okay, Rocky,"

I say.

"Get comfortable.

I have a lot of science to explain."

- He knocked twice and leaned into my office.

"Dr.

Grace?

Are you Dr.

Grace?"

It wasn't a large office, but you're lucky to have any personal space at all on an aircraft carrier.

Before it held the high honor of being my office, the room was a storage locker for bathroom supplies.

The crew had three thousand butts that needed daily wiping.

I got to keep the room as my office until the next time we were in port.

Then they'd fill it up with more supplies.

I was approximately as critical as toilet paper.

I looked up from my laptop.

The short, somewhat disheveled man at the door waved awkwardly.

"Yeah,"

I said.

"I'm Grace.

You are...?"

"Hatch.

Steve Hatch.

University of British Columbia.

Nice to meet ya."

I gestured to the folding chair in front of the folding table I used as a desk.

He shuffled in, carrying a bulbous metal object.

I'd never seen anything like it.

He plunked it on my table.

I looked at the object.

It was like someone had flattened a medicine ball, added a triangle to one end, and a trapezoid to the other.

He sat in the chair and stretched his arms.

"Man, that was weird.

I've never been on a helicopter before.

Have you?

Well, of course you have.

How else would you get here?

I mean, I guess you could have used a boat, but probably not.

I hear they keep the carrier far away from land in case there's a disaster during Astrophage experiments.

A boat would have been nicer, honestly, that helicopter ride almost made me puke.

But I'm not complaining.

I'm just happy to be involved."

"Um"-I gestured to the object on my desk-"what is this thing?"

He somehow became even more energetic.

"Ah, right!

That's a beetle!

Well, a prototype for one, anyway.

My team and I think we have most of the kinks worked out.

Well, you never have all the kinks worked out, but we're ready for actual engine tests.

And the university said we had to do those here on the carrier.

Also the provincial government of British Columbia said it.

Oh, and the national government of Canada said it too.

I'm Canadian, by the way.

But don't worry!

I'm not one of those anti-American Canadians.

I think you guys are all right."

"Beetle?"

"Yeah!"

He picked it up and turned the trapezoid toward me.

"This is how the Hail Mary crew will send us back the information.

It's a little self-contained spacecraft that will automatically navigate itself back to Earth from Tau Ceti.

Well, from anywhere, really.

That's what me and my team have been working on for the past year."

I peek into the trapezoid and see a shiny glasslike surface.

"Is that a spin drive?"

I asked.

"Sure is!

Man, those Russians know their stuff.

We just used their designs and everything came out great.

At least, I think it navigation and steering."

He turned the device around and faced the triangular head toward me.

"This is where the cameras and computer are.

No fancy-schmancy inertial-navigation nonsense.

It uses ordinary visible light to see the stars.

It identifies constellations and works out its orientation from that."

He tapped the center of the bulbous carapace.

"There's a little DC generator in here.

As long as we have Astrophage, we have power."

"What can it carry?"

I ask.

"Data.

It's got a redundant RAID array with more memory storage than anyone would ever need."

He knocked on the dome.

It echoed slightly.

"The bulk of this puppy is fuel storage.

It'll need about 125 kilos of Astrophage to make the trip.

Seems like a lot but...man...twelve light-years!"

I lifted the device and hefted it in my hands a couple of times.

"How does it turn?"

"Reaction wheels inside,"

he said.

"It spins them one way, the ship turns the other.

Easy-peasy."

"Interstellar navigation is 'easy-peasy'?"

I smiled.

He snickered.

"Well, for what we have to do, yeah.

It has a receiver that's constantly listening for a signal from Earth.

Once it hears that signal, it'll broadcast its location and await instructions from the Deep Space Network.

We don't have to be super accurate with the navigation.

We just need it to show up within radio range of Earth.

Anywhere within the orbit of Saturn or so will do just fine."

I nod.

"And then scientists can tell it exactly how to get back.

Clever."

He shrugged.

"They'll probably do that, yeah.

But they don't need to.

They'll have it radio over all the data first thing.

The information gets across.

Then they can collect it later if they want.

Oh, and we're making four of these.

All we need is for one of them to survive the trip."

I turned the beetle this way and that.

It was surprisingly light.

A few pounds at most.

"Okay, so there are four of these.

How likely is each one to survive the trip?

Is there at least a little system redundancy aboard?"

He shrugged.

"Not that much, no.

But it doesn't have to travel for nearly as long as the Hail Mary does.

So stuff doesn't have to survive as long."

"It's going the same route, right?"

I asked.

"Why doesn't it take the same time?"

"Because the Hail Mary's acceleration is limited by the soft, squishy humans inside.

The beetle doesn't have that problem.

Everything aboard is military-grade cruise-missile electronics and parts that can handle hundreds of g's of force.

So it gets to relativistic speed much faster."

"Oh, interesting..."

I wondered if this would make a good question for my students.

I dismissed the idea immediately.

It was absurdly complicated math no eighth grader would be able to handle.

"Yeah,"

Hatch said.

"They accelerate at five hundred g's until they reach a cruising speed of 0.93 c.

It'll take over twelve years to get back to Earth, but all told the little guys will only experience about twenty months.

Do you believe in God?

I know it's a personal question.

I do.

And I think He was pretty awesome to make relativity a thing, don't you?

The faster you go, the less time you experience.

It's like He's inviting us to explore the universe, you know?"

He fell silent and stared at me.

"Well,"

I said.

"This is really impressive.

Good work."

"Thanks!"

he said.

"So can I have some Astrophage to test it?"

"Sure,"

I said.

"How much you want?"

"How about a hundred milligrams?"

I drew back.

"Easy there, cowboy.

That's a lot of energy."

"All right, all right.

Can't blame a guy for trying.

How about one milligram?"

"Yeah, I can swing that."

He clapped.

"Hell yeah!

Astrophage comin' my way!"

He leaned forward to me.

"Isn't it amazing?

Astrophage, I mean?

It's like...the coolest thing ever!

Again, God's just handing us the future!"

"Cool?"

I said.

"It's an extinction-level event.

If anything, God's handing us the apocalypse."

He shrugged.

"I mean, maybe a little.

But man.

Perfect energy storage!

Imagine a battery-powered household.

Like- you have a double-A battery, but full of Astrophage.

That'd last your house about a hundred thousand years.

Imagine buying a car and never having to charge it up?

The entire concept of power grids is going to end.

And it'll all be clean, renewable energy once we start breeding the stuff on the moon or something.

All it needs is sunlight!"

"Clean?

Renewable?"

I said.

"Are you suggesting Astrophage will be...good for the environment?

Because it won't be.

Even if Hail Mary finds a solution, we're looking at a mass extinction.

Twenty years from now, a whole bunch of species on Earth will be extinct.

And we're working hard to make sure humans aren't one of them."

He waved off my comment.

"Earth's had five mass extinction events in the past.

And humans are clever.

We'll pull through."

"We'll starve!"

I said.

"Billions of people are going to starve."

"Naaaah,"

he said.

"We're already stockpiling food.

We've got a bunch of methane in the air to hold in the solar energy.

It'll be all right.

As long as Hail Mary succeeds."

I just stared at him for a moment.

"You are, without a doubt, the most optimistic person I've ever met."

He gave me a double thumbs-up.

"Thanks!"

He picked up the beetle and turned to leave.

"Come on, Pete, let's get you some Astrophage!"

"Pete?"

I asked.

He looked over his shoulder.

"Sure.

I'm naming them after the Beatles.

The British rock group."

"I take it you're a fan?"

He turned back to face me.

"Fan?

Oh, yes.

I don't want to exaggerate, but Sgt.

Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band is the greatest musical accomplishment in the history of mankind.

I know, I know.

Many would disagree.

But they're wrong."

"Fair enough,"

I said.

"But why Pete?

Aren't the Beatles named John, Paul, George, and Ringo?"

"Sure.

And that's what we'll call the ones aboard the Hail Mary.

But this fella is for testing in low Earth orbit.

I get a whole SpaceX launch just for me!

Isn't that amazing!

Anyway, I named him after Pete Best-he was the drummer for the Beatles before Ringo."

"Okay, I didn't know that,"

I said.

"Now you do.

I'm gonna get that Astrophage now.

I've got to make sure these beetles will be able to...'Get Back.' "

"Okay."

He frowned.

"

'Get Back.' It's a song.

It's by the Beatles."

"Sure.

Okay."

He spun on his heel and left.

"Some people got no appreciation for the classics."

I was left confused in his wake.

Pretty sure I wasn't the first.

R ocky was dumbfounded by relativity.

For the first couple of hours, he simply refused to believe me.

But then, as I showed more and more about how it explained his trip, he came around.

He doesn't like it, but he accepts that the universe uses rules that are much more complicated than we can see.

And since then, we've spent an eternity making chain.

I made molds as fast as I could and Rocky cranked out links as fast as xenonite would set.

It was a good system-one with a geometric progression of results.

Every new mold I made added one to the number of links Rocky could make per batch.

Chain, chain, chain.

If I never see another chain again in my life, it will be too soon.

Ten kilometers of chain-each link just 5 centimeters long.

That's two hundred thousand links.

Each one connected by hand or claw.

It worked out to each of us working eight hours per day for two weeks doing nothing but connecting links.

I saw chain whenever I closed my eyes.

I dreamed of chain every night.

One of my dinner packets was spaghetti and all I could see were smooth, white chains instead of noodles.

But we got it done.

Once we had all the links made, we assembled them in parallel.

We both made ten-meter lengths that we linked into twenties, and so on.

At least we could be efficient that way.

The tricky part was putting it all somewhere.

Ten kilometers is a lot of chain.

The lab ended up being sort of a holding area.

And even then, it just wasn't big enough.

Rocky-ever the talented engineer- made large spools that could just barely fit through the airlock.

With a whole bunch of EVAs, I mounted them to the hull.

Then I stored the chain on them in 500-meter chunks.

But of course, to do EVAs I had to spin down the centrifuge.

So everything from that point on was in zero g.

Ever assemble chain in zero g?

It's not fun.

The final assembly of those 500-meter chunks was challenging, to say the least.

I had to connect all twenty of them together while wearing my EVA suit.

Fortunately, I had the manipulator device from the IVME.

NASA didn't intend for it to be a chain-making tool, but that's what I used it for.

Now Rocky and I float in the control room.

He's in his bulb and I'm in my pilot's seat.

"Status of probe?"

I say.

Rocky checks his readouts.

"Device is functioning."

Rocky did a good job on the sampler probe.

At least, I think he did.

Engineering isn't my forte.

The sampler is a steel sphere, 20 centimeters across.

It has a nice, thick ring on top that connects to the chain.

Small holes perforate the sphere along its equator.

They lead to a hollow inner chamber.

There's a pressure sensor in there and a few actuators.

The pressure sensor knows when the probe is at the right altitude, and will trigger the actuator to seal off the chamber.

It's a simple matter of rotating the inner chamber shell a few degrees to deliberately misalign the holes in the outer sphere.

That misalignment, along with some well-placed gaskets, will seal the local air in the chamber.

He also added a thermometer and heater in there.

Once the sampler seals, the heater will maintain whatever temperature the air inside started at.

Simple stuff, really, but I hadn't thought of it.

Life can be pretty picky about temperature ranges.

The only remaining piece is a small radio transmitter that broadcasts a weird analog signal I wasn't able to read or decode with my equipment.

Apparently it's a very standard Eridian data connection.

But he has the receiver for it and that's what matters.

Just like that, with minimal complication, Rocky had made a life-support system for Adrian life-forms-a system that didn't need to know the conditions to provide in advance.

It just maintains the status quo.

He really is a genius.

I wonder if all Eridians are like that, or if he's special.

"I guess...we're ready?"

I say.

I'm not exactly brimming with confidence.

"Yes,"

he quavers.

I strap myself into the pilot's seat.

He uses three of his hands to grip handholds in his bulb.

I bring up the Attitude Control panel and initiate a roll.

Once I have the ship pointed backward to our direction of travel and parallel to the ground below, I halt the rotation.

Now we're hurtling along, butt-first, at 12 kilometers per second.

I need that to be almost zero.

"Orientation is good,"

I say.

"Initiating thrust."

"Yes,"

says Rocky.

He watches his readout screen intently.

It shows him the textured version of my own screen, thanks to that camera he set up earlier.

"Here goes..."

I fire up the spin drives.

We go from zero g to 1.5 g's in under a second.

I am pressed back in my chair and Rocky grabs a support with a fourth hand to stay steady.

As the Hail Mary slows down, our velocity can no longer keep us in orbit.

I glance at the Radar panel and it confirms that we are losing altitude.

I adjust the ship's attitude so we are pointing very slightly upward from horizontal.

Just a fraction of a degree.

Even that small amount is too much!

The radar shows us gaining altitude rapidly.

I bring the angle back down.

This is a sloppy, nasty, horrible way to fly a spacecraft, but it's all I have.

There was no point to calculating this maneuver in advance.

There are so many variables and ways to mess up the math I'd be flying on manual almost immediately anyway.

After a few more overcorrections, I get the feel for it.

I increase the angle bit by bit as the ship slows down with respect to the planet.

"You tell when to release probe,"

Rocky says.

His claw hovers over the button that will eject the spools and let the chain fall freely.

We can only hope it doesn't get tangled.

"Not yet,"

I say.

The attitude screen shows we're at 9 degrees from the horizontal.

I need to get us to 60.

Something catches my eye off to the right.

It's the external camera feed.

The planet below is...

glowing.

No.

Not the whole planet.

Just the bit right behind us.

It's the atmosphere reacting with the IR blast from the engines.

The Hail Mary is dumping hundreds of thousands of times more energy into that spot than Tau Ceti does.

The IR heats the air so much it ionizes and it's literally red hot.

The brightness increases as our angle gets more severe.

Then the affected area starts to grow.

I knew it would be significant, but I had no idea it would be like this.

We're leaving a red streak across the sky, destroying anything in the air.

The carbon dioxide is probably being ripped apart from pure heat energy into particulate carbon and free oxygen.

The oxygen might not even be forming O2.

That's a lot of heat.

"The engines are heating up Adrian's air a lot,"

I say.

"How you know, question?"

"Sometimes I can see heat."

"What, question?!

Why you no tell me this, question?"

"It's related to sight...there's no time to explain it.

Just trust me: We are making the atmosphere very hot."

"Danger, question?"

"I don't know."

"I no like that response."

We angle up and up and up.

The glow behind us gets brighter and brighter.

Finally, we reach the correct angle.

"Angle achieved,"

I say.

"Happy!

Release, question?"

"Stand by.

Velocity..."-I check the navigation console -"127.5 meters per second!

Just what I calculated!

Holy cow, it worked!"

I feel the pull of Adrian, tugging me into my seat.

This is one of those things I frequently have to explain to my students.

Gravity doesn't just "go away"

when you're in orbit.

In fact, the gravity you experience in orbit is pretty much the same as you'd experience on the ground.

The weightlessness that astronauts experience while in orbit comes from constantly falling.

But the curvature of the Earth makes the ground go away at the same rate you fall.

So you just fall forever.

The Hail Mary isn't falling anymore.

The engines hold us up in the sky and our tilt makes us scooch forward at 127 meters per second-about 285 miles per hour.

Fast for a car, but amazingly slow for a spaceship.

The air behind us glows so bright the external camera shuts down to protect its digitizer.

The Life Support panel comes up on my main screen, unprompted.

, it warns.

"Air is hot,"

I call out.

"Ship is hot."

"Ship no touch air,"

Rocky says.

"Why is ship hot, question?"

"It's bouncing our IR back at us.

And it's so hot now it emits its own IR.

We're getting cooked."

"You ship is Astrophage-cooled, question?"

"Yes.

Astrophage cools ship."

Astrophage conduits run all along the hull for just such an occasion.

Well, not the occasion of "blasting a planet's atmosphere with so much IR light the results can melt steel"

but the general situations where heat builds up.

Mostly from the sun or Tau Ceti heating the ship up and the heat having nowhere to go.

"Astrophage absorb heat.

We safe."

"Agree.

We safe.

And we ready.

Drop probe!"

"Drop probe!"

He slams his claw on the Drop button.

I hear the scrape and clink of the spools sliding off the hull one at a time and falling toward the planet below.

Twenty spools in all, each one drops and unwinds before the next is released.

Our best effort at keeping the chain from getting tangled.

"Spool Six away..."

Rocky reports.

The Life Support panel blinks its warning again.

I mute it again.

Astrophage lives on stars.

I'm sure a little reflected IR light won't be too much heat for it to handle.

"Spool Twelve away..."

Rocky says.

"Sampler signal good.

Sampler detecting air now."

"Good!"

I say.

"Good good,"

he says.

"Spool Eighteen away...air density increase..."

With the external cameras offline, I can't see any of what's going on.

But Rocky's readings are right in line with our plan.

Right now, the chain is unfurling as it falls.

Our angled engines keep us in the sky, but nothing keeps the chain from falling straight down.

"Spool Twenty away.

All spools released.

Air density of sampler is almost Astrophage breeding ground level..."

I watch Rocky with bated breath.

"Sampler has closed!

Seal is airtight, heater is on!

Success success success!"

"Success!"

I yell.

It's working!

It's actually working!

We have a sample of Adrian air from the Astrophage breeding zone!

If there are any predators, they have to be there, right?

I hope so.

"Step two now."

I sigh.

This is not going to be fun.

I unhitch my restraints and climb out of the chair.

Adrian's 1.4 g's of gravity pulls me down at a 30-degree angle.

The whole room feels tilted because, actually, it is tilted.

This isn't engine thrust I'm feeling.

It's gravity.

One point four g's isn't too bad.

Everything's a bit harder, but not unreasonably so.

I climb into the Orlan EVA suit.

This is going to be difficult, to say the least.

I have to go outside and do an EVA while completely under the effects of gravity.

Needless to say, absolutely no part of the EVA suit, the airlock, or my training was remotely designed for this possibility.

Who would have thought I would have to tromp around on the ship in full gravity?

More than full, in fact?

Yet however much gravity there may be, there's still no air.

Worst of all worlds.

But there's no other way.

I have to get the sample.

Right now, the sampler hangs at the end of a 10-kilometer chain, which is just dangling in the air.

There's no easy way for us to get it back to the ship.

When planning this all out, my first thought was to thrust away from the planet, then collect the sampler when we're back to zero g.

Problem is, there's literally no way to do that without vaporizing the sampler.

Any path I try to take to get the ship out of Adrian's gravity-or even into a stable orbit-will mean using the spin drives.

They'd push the ship along, which would make the chain and sample lag behind us and into the IR blast behind the ship.

And then the sampler, everything in it, and the chain all become individual, very hot atoms.

The next idea I had was to make a huge spool that could winch up the chain.

But Rocky informed me he'd never be able to make a spool big enough and strong enough to bring up the entire 10-kilometer length.

Rocky had a pretty clever thought: The sampler could climb the chain when it was done.

But after some experimenting he ditched the idea.

He said the risks just weren't worth it.

So we have...this other plan.

I grab a special winch Rocky designed and attach it to my suit's tool belt.

"Be careful,"

says Rocky.

"You are friend now."

"Thanks,"

I say.

"You are friend also."

"Thank."

I cycle the airlock and look outside.

- This is a strange experience.

Space is black.

The planet is majestic below me.

Everything looks like it should when in orbit.

But there's gravity.

A red glow from the planet peeks out around the edges of the Hail Mary.

I'm no dope-I oriented the ship to make sure it would shield me from the deadly heat bouncing up off the atmosphere.

The airlock door is "up."

I have to pull myself-and a hundred pounds of gear-up and through that opening.

And I have to do it in 1.4 g.

It takes me a full five minutes.

I grunt.

I say a bunch of not- really-profane things, but I get it done.

Soon I'm standing on top of my ship.

One misstep and I'll fall to my death.

I wouldn't have to wait long for it either.

As soon as I fell below the ship, the engines would punch my ticket.

I attach a tether to the handrail at my feet.

Will a zero-g tether save me if I fall?

It's not mountain-climbing gear.

It wasn't made for this.

Better than nothing, I guess.

I walk along the hull toward the chain anchor point.

It's a large xenonite square that Rocky made.

He explained in great detail how to adhere it to the hull.

Looks like it did the job just fine.

The chain is still attached.

I reach it and get down on my hands and knees.

The gravity is absolutely brutal in this EVA suit.

No part of this is how things are supposed to be.

I hook my (possibly worthless) tether to the nearest handrail and pull the winch from my tool belt.

The chain hangs away at a 30-degree angle and disappears into the planet below.

It just goes so far away it's too thin for me to perceive after a kilometer or so.

But I know from Rocky's readings it's the full 10 kilometers down, with a sample container full of potential salvation for two entire planets full of people.

I wedge the winch between the chain and the anchor plate.

The chain doesn't budge-not even a millimeter.

But that was expected.

There's just no way human muscle could move something that heavy.

I hook the winch to the anchor plate.

The casing of the winch is xenonite, so the xenonite-to-xenonite connection should have plenty of strength for what comes next.

I smack the winch a couple of times just to make sure it's properly seated.

It is.

Then I press the activation button.

A gear pops out from the center of the winch, one cog catching a chain link through the center.

The gear turns and drags the chain into the internal workings of the winch.

Inside, it rotates the link 180 degrees, then slides it across its neighbor to release it.

When we made the chain, we did it with "trap"

links that can connect without us having to seal each one.

It's extremely unlikely that random movement would separate the links.

But the winch is deliberately designed to do just that.

Once the link is freed, the winch ejects it out the side and repeats the process for the next link.

"The winch works,"

I say through my radio.

"Happy,"

comes Rocky's voice.

It's simple, straightforward, elegant, and solves all the problems.

The winch is powerful enough to lift the chain.

It separates the links and lets them fall into the planet below.

Having a long length of chain dangling down next to the one we're pulling up would be a disaster.

Imagine earbud wires getting tangled, then multiply that by 10 kilometers.

No, each link will take its own path to oblivion below and the rising chain will be unaffected.

"When winch get to link two hundred sixteen, you increase speed."

"Yes."

I have no idea how many links it's done so far.

But it's plugging along nicely.

Probably about two links per second.

A safe, slow beginning.

I watch for two minutes.

That's probably about right.

"All good.

At least two hundred sixteen links now."

"Increase speed."

Two links per second may seem like a good clip, but it would take about thirty hours to raise the chain at that rate.

I don't want to be out here that long and we definitely don't want to stay in this risky constant-thrust situation for that long.

I press the control lever forward.

The winch speeds up.

Everything seems fine, so I put it in the final position.

Now the links fly out of the winch faster than I can count and the chain rises at a brisk pace.

"The winch is at maximum speed.

All is good."

"Happy."

I keep my hand on the control lever and my eyes on the chain.

If that sampler gets to the winch, everything will go south.

The sample container will be torn apart, all the samples will die, and we'd have to make another chain.

I don't want to do that.

Lord, I cannot express how much I don't want to do that.

I squint into the distance, ever vigilant.

Boredom is a real problem here.

I know it will take quite a while to pull up this whole chain, but I have to be ready for the sampler.

"Sample device radio signal strong,"

Rocky says.

"Getting closer.

Be ready."

"I'm ready."

"Be very ready."

"I am very ready.

Be calm."

"Am calm.

You be calm."

"No, you be cal-wait.

I see the sampler!"

The end of the chain, with the sampler attached, rushes up toward me from the planet below.

I grab the control lever and slow the winch.

The sampler climbs slower and slower until it's at a crawl.

All but the last few links of the chain fall to their doom and the sampler is finally within reach.

I stop the winch.

Rather than risk stupidly dropping the big orb, I grab the top remaining link of the chain and unhitch it from the winch.

Now I have a ball and chain.

I hang on to the chain for dear life and clip it to my belt.

I still don't let go.

I'm not taking any chances with this.

"Status, question?"

"I have the sampler.

Returning."

"Amaze!

Happy happy happy!"

"Don't be happy until I'm inside!"

"Understand."

I take two steps and the ship shudders.

I fall to the hull and grab two handrails.

"What the heck was that?!"

"I not know.

Ship move.

Sudden."

The ship shudders again, this time it's a steady pull.

"We're thrusting the wrong direction!"

"Get inside fast fast fast!"

The horizon rises in my view.

The Hail Mary isn't maintaining her angle anymore.

She's tilting forward.

That is absolutely not supposed to be happening.

I clamber from handhold to handhold.

I don't have time to attach the tether each step.

I just have to hope I don't fall.

Another sudden jerk and the hull slips sideways under my feet.

I fall on my back but I keep my death grip on the sampler chain.

What is going on?!

No time to think.

I have to get inside before the ship capsizes and kills me.

I cling to the handholds for dear life and crawl to the airlock.

Thank God it's still facing more or less up.

I hold the sampler to my chest and fall inside.

I land headfirst.

Good for me the Orlan helmet is so sturdy.

I squirm to my feet as best I can in the clunky spacesuit.

I reach up, grab the outer hatch, and slam it closed.

I cycle the airlock and get out of the suit as fast as I can.

I'll leave the sampler in the airlock for now.

I need to know what the heck is wrong with the ship.

I half climb, half fall into the control room.

Rocky is in his bulb.

"Screens flash many colors!"

he yells over the din.

He points his camera here and there, watching the feed on his textured screen.

A metallic groan screams from somewhere down below.

Something is bending and doesn't want to.

I think it's the hull.

I get in the control seat.

No time to strap in.

"Where's that noise coming from?"

"All around,"

he says.

"But loudest at starboard dormitory wall segment.

It bending inward."

"Something's tearing the ship apart!

Got to be the gravity."

"Agree."

But that bothers me in the back of my mind.

This ship was made for acceleration.

It endured four years at 1.5 g's.

Surely it can handle this similar force?

Something doesn't add up.

Rocky grabs several of his handholds for support.

"We have sampler.

We leave now."

"Yeah, let's get out of here!"

I throw the spin-drive controls to full.

The ship can pull up to 2 g when push comes to shove.

And I think push has definitely come to shove.

The ship lurches forward.

This is not a graceful, well- executed burn.

This is nothing short of panicked flight.

The efficient way to leave a gravity well is laterally, to take advantage of the Oberth effect.

I try to keep us more or less level to the ground below.

I'm not trying to get away from Adrian.

I just want to get into a stable orbit that doesn't need engines to maintain.

I need velocity, not distance.

I need to keep the drives at full power for ten minutes.

That should get us the 12 kilometers per second we need to stay in orbit.

I just need to point a little above the horizon and thrust.

At least, that's what I want.

But it's not happening.

The ship keeps yawing forward and drifting laterally.

What is going on?!

"Something wrong,"

I say.

"She's fighting me."

Rocky has no trouble hanging on.

He has many multiples of my strength.

"Engine damage, question?

Much heat from Adrian."

"Maybe."

I check the Nav console.

We're gaining velocity.

That's something, at least.

"Hull bending in big room below dormitory,"

Rocky says.

"What?

There's no room below-oh."

He can sense the whole ship with his echolocation.

Not just the habitable area.

So when he says "big room below the dormitory,"

he means the fuel tanks.

Oh dear.

"Turn off engines, question?"

"We're going too slow.

We'll fall into the atmosphere."

"Understand.

Hope."

"Hope."

Yes, hope.

That's all we have at this point.

Hope that the ship doesn't wreck itself before we get into a stable orbit.

The next several minutes are the tensest of my life.

And, if I may say so, I've had some pretty tense moments these past few weeks.

The hull continues to make horrible noises, but we're not dead, so I guess it didn't breach.

Finally, after what seems like a whole lot more than ten minutes, our velocity is enough to stay in orbit.

"Velocity good.

Stopping engines."

I slide the spin-drive power sliders to zero.

I let my head fall back to the headrest in relief.

Now we can take our time and figure out what went wrong.

No need to use the engines to...

Wait.

My head fell back into the headrest.

It fell back into the headrest.

I hold my arms out in front of me, then relax them.

They fall down and to the left.

"Uh..."

"Gravity still here,"

says Rocky, echoing my own observations.

I check the Nav console.

Our velocity is good.

We're in a stable orbit around Adrian.

Well, actually it's ugly as heck-the apogee is 2,000 kilometers farther from the planet than perigee.

But it's an orbit, darn it.

And it's stable.

I check the Spin Drive panel again.

All three drives are at zero.

No thrust at all.

I delve into the diagnostics screen and confirm that each of the 1,009 revolver triangles spread throughout the three drives is stationary.

They are.

I let my arm fall again.

It does the same strange movement.

Down and to the left.

Rocky does a similar motion with one of his arms.

"Adrian gravity, question?"

"No.

We're in orbit."

I scratch my head.

"Spin drive, question?"

"No.

It's offline.

There's zero thrust."

I let my arm fall again.

This time it hits the armrest of the seat.

"Ow!"

I shake my hand.

That really hurt.

I let it fall again as an experiment.

It fell faster this time.

That's why it hurt.

Rocky pulls several tools from his jumpsuit bandolier and drops them one at a time.

"Gravity increasing."

"This doesn't make any sense!"

I say.

I check the Nav panel again.

Our speed has increased considerably since I last looked.

"Our velocity is increasing!"

"Engines on.

Only explanation."

"Can't be.

The spin drives are off.

There's nothing to accelerate us!"

"Force increasing,"

he says.

"Yes,"

I say.

I'm having trouble breathing now.

Whatever we're at, it's much higher than a g or two.

Things are getting out of hand.

With all my strength, I reach to the screen and cycle through panels.

Navigation, Petrovascope, External View, Life Support...each one seems completely normal.

Until I reach "Structure."

I'd never paid a lot of attention to the Structure panel.

It's just a gray outline of the ship.

But now, for the first time, it has something to say.

There's an irregular red blotch on the port fuel tank.

Is that a hull breach?

It could be.

The fuel tanks are outside the pressure vessel.

They could have a huge hole in them and we wouldn't lose air.

"There's a hole in the ship..."

I say.

I struggle to switch back to the external cameras.

Rocky watches my screen with his camera and texture pad.

He's doing fine-no problems at all from the tremendous forces.

I angle the cameras around to look at the affected hull.

And there it is.

A massive hole in the port side of the ship.

It must be 20 meters long and half as wide.

The edges of the hole tell the tale-the hull melted.

It was the blowback from Adrian's atmosphere.

Not a physical explosion, but pure, unadulterated infrared light reflected off the air.

The ship tried to warn me that the hull got too hot.

I should have listened.

I thought the hull couldn't melt.

It was cooled by Astrophage!

But of course it can melt.

Even if Astrophage is a perfect heat absorber (and it may be), the heat has to conduct through the metal before it can be absorbed.

If the outer layer of the hull reaches its melting point faster than the heat can transmit through the thickness of the hull, the Astrophage can't do anything about it.

"Confirmed.

Hull breach.

Port fuel tank."

"Why thrust, question?"

It all comes together.

"Oh crap!

The Astrophage in the fuel bay!

It's exposed to space!

That means it can see Adrian!

My fuel is migrating to Adrian to breed!"

"Bad bad bad!"

That's where the thrust is from.

Trillions and trillions of horny little Astrophages, all ready to breed.

And then, all at once, they see Adrian.

Not just a source of carbon dioxide, but their ancestral homeland.

The planet they evolved over billions of years to seek out.

As each new sheet of Astrophage rushes out of the ship and toward Adrian, the next layer of Astrophage gets exposed.

The ship is being pushed along by the IR thrust from the departing Astrophage.

Fortunately, the rest of the Astrophage behind them are present to absorb the energy.

But in absorbing that energy they absorb the momentum.

It's far from a perfect system.

It's a chaotic, sputtering explosion.

Any second now, this could degenerate into a much larger and less directed plume of IR and we'll be vaporized.

I have to make this stop.

I can jettison fuel bays!

I saw that feature on my first day in the control room!

Where the heck was it...?

It takes all the strength I have to lift my arm to the screen, but I manage to bring up the Astrophage panel.

It shows a map of the ship and the fuel-bay area is broken up into nine rectangles.

I don't have time to cross-reference these rectangles to the part of the bad hull.

I grunt, force my arm forward, and tap one that I think is in the right place.

"Throwing...away...bad...fuel bay..."

I say through clenched teeth.

"Yes yes yes!"

Rocky says, cheering me on.

The Fuel Pod screen pops up: 112.079 .

Next to that, a button labeled "Jettison."

I punch it.

A confirmation dialog pops up.

I confirm.

A sudden jerk of acceleration hurls me to the side.

Even Rocky is unable to hold position.

He slams into the side of his bulb but quickly rights himself and clamps onto his handholds with all five hands.

The hull groans louder than before.

The acceleration has not stopped and my vision grows foggy.

The pilot's seat begins to bend.

I'm about to black out, so we're probably at 6 g or more.

"Thrust continues,"

Rocky quavers.

I can't reply.

I can't get any sound out at all.

I know the fuel bay I jettisoned was in the affected area.

There must be more than one breached bay.

No time for subtlety.

In a few seconds the force will be too strong for me to reach the screen at all.

If there's a second breached bay, it'll be adjacent to the bay I just ditched.

But there are two adjacent bays.

I pick one at random.

Fifty-fifty shot.

With herculean effort, I tap its icon, the Jettison button, and confirm.

A jolt rocks the ship and I'm thrown around like a rag doll.

In my ever-darkening peripheral vision I see Rocky curled up into a ball, bouncing against the walls, leaving silver blood splatters wherever he hits.

If anything, the force is worse than before.

But wait...now it's the other direction.

Instead of being pulled back into my seat, I'm now being pulled away from it, my body pressing into the restraints.

The Centrifuge screen, of all things, comes to the foreground.

, it blinks.

"Nnnng,"

I say.

I meant to say Oh God, but I can't breathe anymore.

All that fuel blasting out into space...it didn't politely leave along the ship's long axis.

It blew out at an angle, spinning us like a top.

And the exploding fuel bays probably made things even worse.

Well, I stopped the fuel leak, at least.

There are no new thrust vectors acting on the ship.

Now I just have to deal with the spin.

I manage to get a breath in.

The centrifugal force is less than the uncontrolled thrust force, but it's still monumental.

But hey, at least it pulls my arms toward the screen instead of away from it.

If I can get the spin drives back online, maybe I can cancel the- My seat finally gives out.

I hear the pops as the anchor points shear off.

I fall forward, into the screen, still strapped to the metal seat, which crushes me from behind.

The chair probably doesn't weigh much in normal gravity.

Maybe 20 kilograms.

But with this much centripetal force, it's like having a cement block on my back.

I can't breathe.

This is it.

The weight of the chair is so much I can't inflate my lungs.

I get dizzy.

Mechanical suffocation, it's called.

It's how boa constrictors kill their prey.

What an odd thing to think as my last thought.

Sorry, Earth, I think.

There.

Much better last thought.

My lungs, now full of carbon dioxide, panic.

But the adrenaline rush doesn't give me the strength I need to escape.

It just keeps me awake so I can experience death in more detail.

Thanks, adrenal glands.

The groaning of the ship has stopped.

I guess anything that was going to break has broken and all that's left is stuff that can handle the stress.

My eyes water.

They sting.

Why?

Am I crying?

I have personally failed my entire species and they're all going to die because of it.

It's a good reason to cry.

But this isn't emotional.

It's pain.

My nose hurts too.

And not from physical pressure or anything.

Something burns at my nasal passages from the inside.

Something probably broke open in the lab.

Some nasty chemical.

Just as well I can't breathe.

I probably wouldn't like the smell.

Then, out of nowhere, I can breathe again!

I don't know how or why, but I gasp and wheeze in my newfound freedom.

I immediately fall into a violent coughing fit.

Ammonia.

Ammonia everywhere.

It's overpowering.

My lungs scream and my eyes water over.

Then there's a new smell.

Fire.

I roll around to see Rocky hovering over me.

Not in his compartment.

He's in the control room!

He has slashed my restraints and pulled the chair free.

He shoves it to the side.

He stands over me, wobbling.

I can feel the heat radiating from his body just inches away.

Smoke billows out of the radiator slits atop his carapace.

His knees buckle and he collapses onto the screen next to me, destroying it.

The LCD unit blacks out and the plastic bezel melts.

I see a trail of smoke leading up the tunnel to the lab and beyond.

"Rocky!

What have you done!"

The crazy bastard must have used the large airlock in the dormitory!

He came into my partition to save me.

And he'll die because of it!

He shivers and folds his legs under himself.

"Save...Earth...Save...Erid..."

he quavers.

Then he slumps down.

"Rocky!"

I grab his carapace without thinking.

It's like putting my hands on a burner.

I jerk away.

"Rocky...no..."

But he is motionless.

R ocky's body heats up the whole room.

I can barely move, the force of the centrifuge is so great.

"Nnnn!"

I groan, pushing myself up off the cracked monitor.

I drag myself across the shards to the next monitor over.

I try not to lift too much of my body up at a time-I have to save my strength.

I slide my finger onto the monitor from the edge and tap the screen-select buttons at the bottom.

I've got one chance at this.

I remember the navigation controls.

The manual-control section has a button to zero out all rotation.

That's mighty tempting right now, but I can't risk it.

The fuel bay is wide open, I've jettisoned a couple of pods, and I have no idea what other damage may have been done.

The last thing I want to do is fire up any spin drives-even the little ones that do attitude control.

I bring up the Centrifuge screen.

It blinks red and white, still angry about the excessive tumble the ship is undergoing.

With effort, I dismiss the warning, then enter into manual mode.

There are a bunch of "hey, don't do this"

kind of dialogs, but I dismiss them all.

Soon I have direct control over the cable spools.

I set them spinning at max speed.

The room spins and tilts in weird ways.

My inner ears and my eyes are not enjoying the discrepancy.

I know it's because the two halves of the ship are separating and that has nasty effects on the forces I feel here in the control room.

But logic doesn't do any good in this situation.

I turn my head and vomit on the wall.

After a few seconds, the force reduces dramatically.

Much more manageable now.

Less than 1 g, actually.

All thanks to the magic of centrifuge math.

The force you feel in a centrifuge is inverse to the square of the radius.

By spooling out the cables, I made the radius go from 20 meters (half the length of the ship) to 75 meters (distance from the control room to the center of mass with full cable extension).

I don't know how much force I was dealing with before, but now it's one-fourteenth as much as it was.

I'm still pinned against the monitor, though not nearly as hard.

I estimate about half a g.

I can breathe again.

Everything feels upside down.

I used the centrifuge in manual mode, so it did exactly what I told it to do and nothing else: It extended the cables.

It did not rotate the crew compartment to face inward.

The centrifuge pushes everything toward the nose of the crew compartment.

The lab is "up"

from me now, and the dormitory is even farther "up."

I don't even know where the manual controls for the crew- compartment rotation are and I don't have time to look for them.

For now, I'll have to work in upside-down land.

I bound to the airlock and open it up.

Everything is a shambles inside, but I don't care.

I untangle the wadded-up EVA suit and detach the gloves.

I put them on.

Back in the control room, I stand on the consoles (the control panels are "down"

now).

I hope I'm not damaging things too much.

I position myself over Rocky's body, grab both sides of his carapace with my gloved hands, and lift.

Good.

God.

I put him back down.

If I try to move him like that, I'll throw out my back.

But I did lift him, however briefly.

It felt like 200 pounds.

Thank god we're in one-half gravity.

He'd weigh 400 pounds at full gravity.

I'll need more than my hands to lift him.

I throw off the gloves, bounce back to the airlock, and fling items aside until I find the safety tethers.

I wrap two tethers under Rocky's carapace and loop them over my shoulders.

I burn my arms in several places during the process, but I'll deal with that later.

I clip each tether to itself under my armpits.

This won't be comfortable and it definitely won't look cool, but my hands will be free and I'll be lifting with my legs.

I reach through the hatchway to the lab with both hands and get ahold of the closest rung of the ladder.

It's slow going at first.

There's no ladder in the control room.

Why would there be?

No one thought it would be upside down.

My shoulders scream in pain.

This is not a well-designed backpack with a properly distributed load.

It's 200 pounds of alien held up by two thin straps digging into my collarbones.

And I just have to hope the melting point of the nylon tethers is higher than Rocky's body temperature.

I grunt and grimace, one rung at a time, until I get my feet into the lab.

I use the edge of the hatchway to brace my feet and pull Rocky up with the straps.

The lab is a disaster.

Everything is in piles all over the ceiling.

Only the table and chairs remain on the floor above me-they're bolted to the floor.

And, thankfully, most of the more delicate equipment is bolted to them.

However, that delicate off-the- shelf lab equipment wasn't designed to be rattled around like popcorn and subjected to 6 or 7 g's.

I wonder how many things are hopelessly broken.

The gravity is less up here.

I'm closer to the center of the centrifuge.

The higher I get the easier things will be.

I kick lab supplies and equipment out of my way and drag Rocky to the dormitory hatchway.

I repeat the painful process I just did a moment ago.

The force is less, but it still hurts.

Again, I use the hatchway as a bracing point to pull Rocky into the room.

My little section of the dormitory barely fits us both.

Rocky's section is a mess, just like the lab.

His workbench wasn't bolted in place, so it's on the ceiling now.

I drag him across the ceiling and I get up on my bunk.

It has swiveled completely around, thanks to its rocking pivot mounting.

It's a handy platform for reaching the airlock between my zone and Rocky's.

The airlock door sits open on my side.

He used it to come save me.

"Man, why did you do that?!"

I grouse.

He could have let me die.

He should have, really.

He could handle the centripetal force, no problem.

He could have taken his time, whipped up an invention, and used it to get back control of the ship.

Yeah, I know, he's a good guy and he saved my life, but this isn't about us.

He has a planet to save.

Why risk his life and his whole mission for me?

The airlock door doesn't reach the ceiling, so I'll have to play "The Floor Is Lava"

to get in.

I hop into the airlock from my bunk, then use the straps to pull Rocky in with me.

I start to climb back out and that's when I see the airlock-control panel.

Or, rather, I see the destroyed box that was once the airlock- control panel.

"Oh, come on!"

I yell.

Both sides of the airlock had control panels, so either Rocky or I could operate it as needed.

But now mine are ruined- probably smacked by some debris flying around during the chaos.

I have to get him back into his environment, but how?

I have an idea.

It's not a good idea.

There's an emergency valve in the airlock chamber itself that can let air in from Rocky's side.

It's there to cover a very specific edge case.

There's no way I can ever enter Rocky's area of the ship.

I certainly can't handle his environment, and my EVA suit would be crushed like a grape.

But Rocky can come into my area with his homemade ball-spacesuit thing.

So, just to be extra safe-just in case there was an emergency while Rocky was in his ball in the airlock- there's a relief valve that will let the air from his side vent in.

It's a large iron lever, so it can be manipulated with the magnets Rocky carries with him while in the ball.

I look at the lever in the airlock.

I glance at the airlock's door to my compartment and its spinning-wheel lock.

I look back to the lever, then back to the door.

I coil my muscles and mentally count to three.

I pull the lever and leap toward my compartment.

Blazing-hot ammonia floods the airlock and dormitory.

I slam the airlock door behind me and spin the wheel lock.

I hear hissing on the other side but I don't see anything.

I might never see anything again.

My eyes burn like they're on fire.

My lungs feel like a hundred knives are having a dance-off.

My skin is numb all along my left side.

And my nose-forget it.

The smell is so overpowering my sense of smell just gives up.

My throat completely closes off.

My body wants nothing to do with the ammonia.

"Com..."

I wheeze.

"Com...pu...ter..."

I want to die.

Pain is everywhere.

I climb into my bunk.

"Help!"

I wheeze.

"Multiple injuries,"

says the computer.

"Excessive eye mucus.

Blood around the mouth, second-degree burns.

Breathing distress.

Triage result: intubate."

The mechanical arms, which thankfully don't seem to have any problem with being upside down, grab me and something is shoved violently down my throat.

I feel a poke on my good arm.

"IV fluids and sedation,"

the computer reports.

And then I'm out like a light.

- I wake up covered in medical equipment and pain.

There's an oxygen mask on my face.

My right arm has an IV and my left arm is bandaged from wrist to shoulder.

It hurts like heck.

Everything else hurts too.

Especially my eyes.

But at least I can see.

That's good.

"Computer,"

I say with a raspy voice.

"How long have I been asleep?"

"Unconsciousness lasted six hours, seventeen minutes."

I take a deep breath.

My lungs feel like they're coated in tar.

Probably phlegm or some other gunk.

I look over to Rocky's area.

He's right where I left him in the airlock.

How can I tell if an Eridian is dead?

When Rocky sleeps all movement stops.

But that's also presumably what happens when an Eridian dies.

I spot a pulse-ox monitor on my right index finger.

"Compu-"

I cough.

"Computer: What is my blood oxygen content?"

"Ninety-one percent."

"It'll have to do."

I take the mask off and sit up in bed.

My bandaged arm stings with every movement.

I pull the various things off of my body.

I open and close my left hand.

It's working.

The muscles are only a little bit sore.

I got hit with a quick blast of very hot, very high-pressure ammonia.

Most likely, I have chemical burns in my lungs and on my eyes.

And probably a physical burn on my arm.

My left side took the brunt of the blast.

Twenty-nine atmospheres of pressure at 210 degrees Celsius (over 400 degrees Fahrenheit!).

That must be what a grenade feels like.

Side note: With no one manning the helm, it's pure luck we didn't crash into the planet.

The ship is either in a stable orbit or we escaped Adrian's gravity entirely.

I shake my head.

It's truly ridiculous how much power I have sitting in the fuel bay.

To not even know if I'm still near a planet...wow.

I'm lucky to be alive.

There's no other way to put it.

Anything I do beyond that moment is a gift from the universe to me.

I step off the bed and stand in front of the airlock.

Gravity is still at one-half g and everything is still upside down.

What can I do for Rocky?

I sit on the floor opposite his body.

I put my hand on the airlock wall.

That feels too melodramatic, so I pull it back.

Okay, I know the very basics of Eridian biology.

That doesn't make me a doctor.

I grab a tablet and swipe through various documents I've made.

I don't remember everything he told me, but at least I took copious notes.

When severely wounded, an Eridian body will shut down so it can try to work on everything at once.

I hope Rocky's little cells are doing their thing in there.

And I hope they know how to fix damage done by: (1) dropping air pressure to one twenty-ninth what he evolved to live in, (2) being suddenly exposed to a bunch of oxygen, and (3) being almost 200 degrees colder than his body expects.

I shake off the worry and return to my notes.

"Ah, here!"

I say.

There's the information I need: Those capillaries in his carapace radiator are made of deoxidized metal alloys.

The ambient circulatory system pumps his mercury-based blood through those vessels and air passes over them.

In Erid's oxygen-free atmosphere, this makes perfect sense.

In ours, it makes a perfect tinderbox.

A bunch of oxygen just passed over very hot metal pipes no thicker than a human hair.

They burned.

That's the smoke I saw coming out of Rocky's vents.

His radiator was literally on fire.

Jesus.

The whole organ must be completely full of soot and other combustion products.

And the capillaries will be coated in oxides, which ruin heat conductivity.

Heck, oxides are insulators.

The worst-possible outcome.

Okay.

If he's dead, he's dead.

I can't do any further harm.

But if he's alive, I have to help.

There's no reason not to try.

But what do I do?

- So many pressures.

So many temperatures.

So many air mixtures.

I have to keep track of them all.

My own environment, Rocky's environment, and now the Adrian Astrophage breeding-ground environment too.

But first: gravity.

I'm sick of living in The Poseidon Adventure.

Time to right this ship.

I make my way back "down"

to the control room.

The center panel is ruined, but the others work fine.

And they're interchangeable anyway.

I'll mount a replacement in the middle when I have time.

I bring up the Centrifuge screen and poke around at the controls a bit.

I finally find the manual controls for the crew- compartment rotation.

They were buried pretty deep in the options; I'm glad I didn't try to find them during the crisis.

I order the crew compartment to rotate.

Very, very slowly.

I set the rate at 1 degree per second.

It takes three minutes to turn around.

And I hear a lot of thunks, clunks, and crashes from the lab.

I don't care about any of that.

I just want to make sure Rocky doesn't get further injured.

This slow rate should make his body slide along the airlock ceiling, then along the wall, and finally to the floor.

That's the plan, anyway.

Once the rotation is complete, things are back to feeling normal, albeit at half a g.

I go back down to the dormitory to check on Rocky.

He's now on the airlock floor, and still right- side up.

Good.

He slid rather than tumbled.

I really want to work on Rocky, but I have to make sure the adventure that may have killed him wasn't in vain.

I grab the sample container from the ship's airlock.

I'm kind of glad I left it there, honestly.

It got cushioned from the crazy sudden accelerations by the EVA suit wadded up with it.

Rocky had the foresight to put readouts on the sampler to tell us what the temperature and pressure inside were.

They're analog dial indicators in Eridian base-six numerology.

But I've seen enough of that to be able to translate.

The inside of the ball is minus 51 degrees Celsius with a pressure of 0.02 atmospheres.

And I know from my spectrometry earlier what the atmospheric makeup is.

Okay, that's the environment I have to duplicate.

I sort through what's left of the lab.

It's slow going because I only have minimal use of my left arm.

But I can use it to help slide things aside, at least.

Just no heavy lifting for now.

I find a vacuum container that's only a little broken.

It's a drum-shaped glass cylinder about a foot in diameter.

I patch up the crack with epoxy and give it a test.

It's able to pump the air out and maintain a vacuum.

If it can maintain a vacuum, it can maintain 0.02 atmospheres.

I put the sample container inside.

The chemical-storage cabinet is still firmly anchored to the wall.

I open it up.

Everything is jumbled around inside, of course, but most containers look intact.

I grab the small vial of Earth Astrophage.

There's about a gram in there, included in the supplies for testing purposes.

I can always get more if I need it.

All I have to do is cut any of the Astrophage-based coolant lines in the hull.

But there's no need for that right now.

The sample is an oily sludge at the bottom of the vial.

I open the vial and scoop it up with a cotton swab.

(That gram of Astrophage has 100 trillion Joules of energy.

Best not to think about it.) I smear the Astrophage along the inner wall of the vacuum chamber and drop the cotton swab in next to the sample probe.

I pump all the air out of the vacuum chamber.

The chemistry supplies include several small cylinders of gases.

Thankfully, steel cylinders are tough, so they survived the game of cosmic pinball we just went through.

I add gases into the vacuum chamber, one at a time, through the infeed valve.

I want to replicate Adrian's atmosphere.

I pump in carbon dioxide, methane, and even argon.

I don't imagine the argon will matter-it's a noble gas, so it shouldn't react with stuff.

But that's what I used to think about xenon, and that turned out to be wrong.

I don't have any way to chill the air in there to minus 50 degrees, so I'll just have to hope whatever the life inside can handle Earth room temperature.

I hear a click just as I finish putting the argon in.

It's the sampler.

Just as Rocky designed them to do, the little valves opened when the outside pressure matched the pressure at the Astrophage breeding altitude on Adrian.

Good old Rocky.

Best engineer I've ever met.

Okay.

I've made the sample as safe as I can.

The air composition and pressure is as close to its native environment as I could get it, and there's plenty of Astrophage to eat.

If there are any microscopic predators in there, they should be in good shape.

I wipe my brow with my bandaged arm, and immediately regret it.

I wince in pain.

"How hard is it, Ryland?!"

I seethe to myself.

"Stop using your burned-up arm!"

I climb back down the ladder to the dormitory.

"Computer: painkillers."

The arms reach up and hand me a paper cup with two pills in it and a cup of water.

I take the pills without even checking what they are.

I look back at my friend and try to come up with a plan....

- It's been over a day since I shoved Rocky in that airlock and he still hasn't moved.

But I haven't been wasting my time.

I've been mad sciencing some inventions in the lab.

This kind of gadget creation is really Rocky's forte, but I give it my best.

I thought about lots of different approaches.

But in the end, I think I should let Rocky's body heal itself as much as possible.

I wouldn't feel comfortable trying to operate on a human, let alone an Eridian.

His body should know what to do.

I just have to let it.

That doesn't mean I'm going to do nothing at all, though.

I have a guess as to what's going on.

And if I'm wrong, my idea for treatment won't hurt him.

Right now, there's a bunch of soot and other combustion by- product crap in his radiator organ.

So it probably doesn't work well.

If he's alive at all, it'll take his body a long time to clear that out.

Maybe too long.

So maybe I can help?

I hold the box in my hand.

It's enclosed on five of six sides with the remaining side open.

The walls are 4-inch-thick steel.

It took me all day to repair the mill and get it working again, but once I did, milling up this box was a breeze.

Inside is a high-powered air pump.

Simple as that.

I can shoot high-pressure air really hard.

I tested it out in the lab and it blew a hole in a 1-millimeter-thick sheet of aluminum from a foot away.

It really works.

I wish I could claim I'm a genius who made this all from scratch, but the reality is I only made the box.

The pump is repurposed from a high-pressure tank.

Also in the box is a battery, a camera, some stepper motors, and a drill.

I'll need all of these things for my plan to work.

I've cleaned up the lab, somewhat.

Most of the equipment is ruined, but some might be fixable.

I cross to the other side of the table, where I have another experiment.

I have a little chip of xenonite-some chaff left over from when we made two hundred thousand chain links.

I used a generous application of epoxy to glue it to the tip of a roughed- up drill bit.

It's been setting for over an hour.

Should be done.

I pick up the bit and the xenonite comes with it.

I use all my strength to try to pull them apart.

I can't.

I nod and smile.

This might work.

I do a few more tests with the box.

My remote control for the motors works well enough.

It's not true remote control.

It's a bank of switches attached to a plastic container lid.

I have wires from the switches going through a tiny hole in the steel, which is in turn filled up with resin.

I can turn the power on or off to any of the components in there.

That's my "remote control."

I can only hope the motors don't have a problem with high heat or ammonia.

I bring everything to the dormitory and prep the epoxy.

I stir it together and apply it generously to the edges of the steel box's open side.

I press the box to the airlock wall and hold it in place.

Then I just stand there for ten minutes, holding the box in place.

I could have taped it to the wall or something while the epoxy set, but I need a really good seal and I don't want to take any chances.

Human hands are better clamps than any tool I might have in the lab.

I gingerly release the box and wait for it to fall.

It doesn't.

I poke it a couple of times and it seems pretty solid.

It's five-minute epoxy, but I'll give it an hour to fully set.

I return to the lab.

I may as well, right?

Let's see what my little alien terrarium is up to.

Nothing much, as it happens.

I don't know what I expected.

Little flying saucers whizzing around in the chamber, maybe?

But the cylinder looks exactly like it did before.

The sampler sits where I left it.

The smear of Astrophage is unchanged.

The cotton swab is...

Hey...

I hunker down and take a seat.

I squint into the chamber.

The cotton swab has changed.

Just a little bit.

It's...fluffier.

Sweet!

Maybe there's something on there I could get a look at.

I just need to get it under a microscope to- Oh.

The realization dawns on me.

I don't have any way to extract samples.

I just plain overlooked that part.

"Dummy!"

I smack my forehead.

I rub my eyes.

Between the pain from my burns and the dopiness from the painkillers, it's hard to concentrate.

And I'm tired.

One thing I learned back in my graduate school days: When you're stupid tired, accept that you're stupid tired.

Don't try to solve things right then.

I have a sealed container that I need to get into eventually.

I'll figure out how later.

I pull out my tablet and take photos of the container.

Science rule number 1: If something is changing unexpectedly, document it.

Just to be more scientific, I point a webcam at the experiment and set up the computer to take a time-lapse at one frame per second.

If anything is happening slowly, I want to know.

I head back to the control room.

Where the heck are we?

Some work with the Nav console and I learn we're still in orbit.

It's stable-ish.

This orbit will probably decay over time.

No rush, though.

I check all the ship's systems and do as many diagnostics as I can.

The ship did pretty well, despite not being remotely designed to handle this situation.

The two fuel bays I jettisoned aren't around anymore, but the other seven look to be in good shape.

There are cracks in the hull here and there, according to the diagnostics test.

But they all seem to be internal.

Nothing facing outside, which is good.

I don't want my Astrophage to see Adrian again.

One of the micro-breaches is highlighted in red.

I take a closer look.

The breach's location has the computer in a tizzy.

It's in the bulkhead between the fuel area and the edge of the pressure vessel.

I can see the concern.

The bulkhead sits between the storage bay below the dormitory and Fuel Bay 4.

I go take a look.

Rocky still hasn't moved.

No surprise there.

My steel box remains where I put it.

I could probably use it now, but I'm resolved to wait the full hour.

I open up the storage panels and pull a bunch of boxes out.

I climb into the storage area with a flashlight and toolkit.

It's cramped-barely 3 feet tall.

I have to crawl around in there for a good twenty minutes before I finally find the breach.

I only spot it because there's a small frosty buildup around the edges.

Air escaping into a vacuum gets really cold really fast.

In fact, that ice probably helped slow the leak.

Not that it mattered.

The leak is so small it would take weeks to be a problem.

And the ship probably has a bunch of spare air in tanks anyway.

Still, there's no reason to just let it leak.

I apply a generous helping of epoxy on a small metal patch and seal the breach.

I have to hold it for considerably more than five minutes before it sets.

Epoxy takes a long time to set when it's cold, and the bulkhead is below freezing at that spot thanks to the leak.

I considered getting a heat gun from the lab but...that's a lot of work.

I just hold the patch for longer.

It takes about fifteen minutes.

I climb back down and wince the whole time.

My arm hurts nonstop now.

It's a constant sting.

It's been less than an hour, but the painkillers aren't doing the job anymore.

"Computer!

Painkillers!"

"Additional dose available in three hours and four minutes."

I frown.

"Computer: What is the current time?"

"Seven-fifteen .., Moscow Standard Time."

"Computer: Set time to eleven ..

Moscow Standard Time."

"Clock set complete."

"Computer: painkillers."

The arms hand me a package of pills and a bag of water.

I gobble them down.

What a stupid system.

Astronauts trusted to save the world but not to monitor their painkiller doses?

Stupid.

Okay.

It's been long enough.

I turn my attention back to the box.

First I'll need to drill a hole in the xenonite.

And that's where all hell will break loose if things go bad.

The general idea here is for the drill inside the box to put a hole in the xenonite and for the box to contain the pressure that rushes in.

But you never know.

The box might not be held on tight enough.

I wear a medical breathing mask and eye protection.

If there's going to be a jet of superheated, high-pressure ammonia in this room, I need to not die from it.

Earlier I filed down a metal rod to be sort of a spike.

The full radius is a little bigger than the drill bit I have readied in the steel box.

I hold the spike and hammer at the ready.

If the pressure blows the box off, I'll hammer the spike into the hole and hope it plugs the gap.

Of course, the pressure might not blow the box off entirely.

It might just spurt out around the edges of the glue joint.

If that happens, I'll have to smack the box with the hammer until it comes off, then drive in the spike.

Yes, it's ridiculously dangerous.

But I just don't know if Rocky will survive without help.

Maybe I'm being emotional instead of rational.

But so what?

I clench the hammer and spike.

Then I activate the drill.

It takes so long for that drill to get through the xenonite, I actually calm down out of boredom.

It's only 1 centimeter, but it's like trying to grind down diamond.

I'm lucky the drill bit is hard enough to do anything at all.

The camera feed from inside shows slow and steady progress.

Instead of drilling like wood or metal, this is more like glass.

It breaks off in chips and chunks.

Finally, the bit breaches to the other side.

It is immediately launched back into the box and bent sideways by the pressure.

There's a whump as Eridian air rushes into the little box.

I squint my eyes.

Then, after a few seconds, I open them again.

If the box was going to blow off, it would have done so right then.

My seal held.

For now anyway.

I breathe a sigh of relief.

But I don't take the mask or goggles off.

You never know when the seal might give out.

I check the camera screen.

This will take careful aim, so I was very clever in making sure a camera could- The camera feed is dead.

A pain in my wrist takes over and I pull it away.

Ah.

Yeah.

Webcams aren't designed to work at 210 degrees Celsius and 29 atmospheres.

And my solid steel box, well, it's solid steel.

Steel is an excellent heat conductor.

I can't even touch it now it's so hot.

I'm still stupid.

First the Adrian sample container, and now this.

I want to sleep, but Rocky is more important.

At least being stupid isn't permanent.

I'll press on.

I know I shouldn't, but I'm too stupid to take that into consideration.

Okay, the camera is dead.

I can't see into the box.

But I can still see Rocky in the airlock because the xenonite is clear.

I'll have to work with what I've got here.

I fire up the high-pressure pump.

It still works-at least, it's making noise.

It should be shooting a very high-pressure jet of air in Rocky's direction.

At 29 atmospheres, air acts almost like water.

You can really knock stuff around with it.

But ammonia is clear.

So I have no idea where it's going.

I adjust the angle of the jet with the servo controls.

Are they working?

I have no idea.

The pump is too loud for me to hear if the servos are doing anything.

I sweep left and right, inching down and up in a pattern.

Finally, I spot something.

One of the levers in the airlock wiggles a bit.

I zero in on it.

It gets pushed back several inches.

"Gotcha!"

I say.

Now I know where it's pointed.

I do some guesswork and aim for Rocky's carapace vents.

Nothing happens, so I do a grid search, back and forth, up and down, until I get a result.

And oh, what a result it is!

I hit the sweet spot.

All of a sudden, Rocky's carapace vents belch out black smoke.

The nasty dust and debris that built up when he was on fire.

It's intensely satisfying.

Like that feeling when you blast an air duster into an old computer.

I sweep back and forth, trying to hit each vent one by one.

The latter vents don't cause nearly the commotion as that first one.

I think they all lead to the same organ-like a human's mouth and nose do.

Multiple orifices for redundancy and safety.

After a few minutes, no more sooty dust is coming out.

I shut off the pump.

"Well, buddy,"

I say.

"I've done all I can.

I just hope you can do the rest."

I spend the rest of the day working on a secondary and tertiary containment box.

I glue them in place over my device.

The Eridian air will have to breach three seals to get into my compartment now.

That will have to do.

I hope Rocky wakes up.

"W e can do this in private,"

I said.

"I can meet with you one at a time."

The three astronauts sat on a couch in front of me.

I'd commandeered the breakroom and locked the door for this meeting.

Yo sat in the center, looking stern as always.

DuBois was to his left, his back arched to provide perfect posture.

Ilyukhina slouched to Yo's left, sipping a beer.

"No need for individual meetings,"

said Yo.

"There's no room on this mission for secrets."

I shifted in my chair.

Why did Stratt send me to do this job?

I'm not a people person and I don't know how to approach delicate matters.

She said something about the crew liking me more than anyone else.

Why?

Maybe I just seemed friendly and pleasant because I was usually standing next to Stratt.

In any event, launch was just a month away and I had to get this information.

"Okay,"

I said.

"Who wants to go first?"

DuBois raised his hand.

"I can start if that's amenable to everyone."

"Sure."

I did a quick test-scribble with my pen.

"So...how would you like to die?"

Yeah.

Awkward topic.

But one that had to be covered.

These three were going to give their lives just so the rest of us could have a fighting chance.

The least we could do was help them die on their own terms.

DuBois handed me a crisp piece of paper.

"I've detailed my request in this document.

I believe you'll find everything in order."

I took the paper.

There were bullet points, charts, and some references at the bottom.

"What am I looking at here?"

DuBois pointed somewhere at the middle of the page.

"I would like to die by nitrogen asphyxiation.

All my research shows it is among the least painful ways to die."

I nodded and took some notes.

"That paper includes a list of the equipment I will need to ensure my death.

It's well within my personal-item mass allowance."

I furrowed my brow, mostly to hide the fact that I had no idea what to say.

He folded his hands on his lap.

"It's a simple matter of a nitrogen tank and a universal connector to the EVA suit.

I can wear the suit and have it pump in nitrogen instead of oxygen.

The suffocation reflex comes from excess carbon dioxide in the lungs, not lack of oxygen.

The suit's systems will continuously remove the carbon dioxide that I exhale, leaving only nitrogen behind.

I will simply get tired and perhaps a bit lightheaded.

Then I will lose consciousness."

"All right."

I tried to remain professional.

"How about if the EVA suit isn't available?"

"Subsection four details the backup plan.

If I cannot use the EVA suit, I will use the ship's airlock.

The volume of the airlock will be sufficient to ensure the carbon-dioxide buildup isn't unpleasant."

"Okay."

I wrote a few more notes down.

Though I hardly had to.

His paper was very thorough.

"We'll make sure there's a tank with plenty of nitrogen, and a backup tank as well just in case the first one leaks."

"Excellent.

Thank you."

I set the paper aside.

"Ilyukhina?

How about you?"

She set her beer down.

"I want heroin."

Everyone looked at her.

Even Yo blanched a little.

"Sorry, what?"

I said.

"Heroin."

She shrugged.

"I have been good girl all my life.

No drugs.

Limited sex.

I want to experience massive pleasure before I die.

People die from heroin all the time.

Must be very nice."

I rubbed my temples.

"You want to die...from a heroin overdose?"

"Not immediately,"

she said.

"I want to enjoy.

Start with normal effective dose.

Get high.

Addicts all agree first few uses are best.

Then downhill from there.

I want to feel those first few doses.

Then overdose when time is right."

"I guess...we can do that,"

I said.

"Death by overdose can be really unpleasant, though."

She waved the concern away.

"Have doctors work out best dose schedule for me.

Correct amount to maximize pleasantness on earlier doses.

Then lethal dose can have other drugs inside to make sure I die without pain."

I wrote down her request.

"Okay.

Heroin.

I don't know where we'll get it, but we'll work it out."

"You have entire world working for you,"

she said.

"Get pharma company to make me heroin.

Cannot be hard."

"Right.

I'm sure Stratt can make a call or something."

I sighed.

Two down, one to go.

"All right.

Commander Yo?

How about you?"

"I want a gun, please,"

he said.

"A Type-92 handgun.

Standard Chinese military-issue.

Store the ammunition in a dry, sealed plastic container for the trip."

At least that made some sense.

Quick and painless.

"A gun.

Got it.

That's easy enough."

He looked back and forth to his crewmates.

"I will be the last to die.

If anything goes wrong with either of your methods, I will be on-hand with the weapon.

Just in case."

"Very considerate,"

said DuBois.

"Thank you."

"Don't shoot me if I look like I'm having a good time,"

Ilyukhina said.

"Understood,"

said Yo.

He turned back to me.

"Will that be all?"

"Yeah,"

I said, already standing.

"This has been very awkward, thanks.

I'm going to...go be somewhere else now."

- I writhe in my bed.

The burns on my arm hurt more than ever.

The painkillers barely do anything.

I'm beginning to wonder if I can find Ilyukhina's heroin.

I won't, I won't.

But I definitely would if this were still a suicide mission.

Focus on that.

This is no longer a suicide mission.

If I play my cards right, I save the world and go home.

The pain subsides somewhat.

It comes and goes.

When I get a chance, I'll take a look at whatever books I have on burns.

I'd at least like to know when it'll stop hurting.

Tap.

"Huh?"

I mumble.

Tap.

I look at the source of the noise.

It's Rocky tapping on the airlock wall.

"Rocky!"

I fall out of my bunk and roll onto my right side before landing.

I scrabble along the floor to the airlock wall.

"Rocky, buddy!

Are you okay?!"

I hear a low thrum from within him.

"I don't understand.

Speak louder."

"Sick..."

he mumbles.

"Yeah, you're sick.

You came into my air.

Of course you're sick!

You almost died!"

He tries to lift himself from the floor, then slumps back down.

"How I return here, question?"

"I moved you."

He taps the ground with a claw, annoyed.

"You touch me air, question?"

"A little, yeah."

He points to my left arm.

"Skin on arm is not smooth.

Damage, question?"

I guess he can see right through the bandages with his sonar.

Must be pretty ugly under there.

I kind of figured that would be the case, but now I know.

"Yeah.

But I'll be fine."

"You damage self to save me.

Thank."

"You did the same thing.

Is your radiator organ okay?

You were on fire and got full of soot and oxides."

"It healing."

He points to the soot all along the wall and floor.

"This come from inside me, question?"

"Yes."

"How it leave me, question?"

I preen a little.

Why shouldn't I?

It was no easy task and I got it done.

I point to the now-triply-covered steel box on the airlock wall.

"I made a device to blow air at you.

I aimed at your radiator vents and all that nasty stuff came out."

He's quiet for a moment.

Then, still a little wobbly, he says, "How long was that stuff inside me, question?"

I run through the day in my mind.

"About...two days."

"You almost kill me."

"What?!

How?!

I blew all the soot out of your radiator!"

He shifts his weight a little.

"Black substance is not soot.

My body make this.

It cover damage while body repairs."

"Oh..."

I say.

"Oh no..."

I didn't blow soot out of his radiator.

I blew the scabs off his wounds!

"I'm so sorry!

I was trying to help."

"Is okay.

If you did earlier I die.

But I heal enough before you do it.

Removing help a little.

Thank."

I put my head in my hands.

"Sorry,"

I say again.

"No say sorry.

You save me when you put me here.

Thank thank thank."

He tries to stand again, but only rises for a second before collapsing.

"I am weak.

I will heal."

I step back and sit on my bunk.

"Would you be more comfortable in zero g?

I can turn off the centrifuge."

"No.

Gravity help heal."

He adjusts his legs into sort of a bed for his carapace to rest on.

Probably a comfortable sleeping pose.

"Sample container is safe, question?"

"Yes.

It's in the lab now.

I made an Adrian environment in a sealed container and put some Astrophage in along with the sample container.

I'll see how it's doing in a bit."

"Good,"

he says.

"Human light sense very useful."

"Thanks,"

I say.

"But my human brain wasn't as useful.

I don't have a way to get the sample out of the container."

He tilts his carapace slightly.

"You seal sample and can no access sample, question?"

"Yes."

"Usually you not stupid.

Why stupid, question?"

"Humans are stupid when we need sleep.

And when we take medicine to stop pain.

I'm tired and drugged right now."

"You should sleep."

I stand up.

"I will in a bit.

But first I have to stabilize our orbit.

Our apogee and perigee are...well, it's not a good orbit."

"Adjust orbit while stupid.

Good plan."

I snicker.

"New word: 'sarcasm.' You say opposite of true meaning to make point.

Sarcasm."

He chimes the word for "sarcasm"

in his language.

- Between exhaustion and drugs, I sleep like a baby.

I wake up feeling a million times better, but my burns feel a million times worse.

I look at the bandages.

They're new.

Rocky is at his workbench, tinkering with his tools.

He's cleaned up his area.

It looks good as new.

"You are awake, question?"

"Yeah,"

I say.

"How are you feeling?

Are you healing?"

He wiggles a claw.

"Much more heal needed.

But some heal complete.

Cannot move much."

I plop my head back on the pillow.

"Same."

"Robot arms do things to you arm while you sleep."

I point to the bandages.

"It changed the cloth.

It's important for human healing to change the cloth."

He pokes at his latest invention with various tools.

"What's that?"

"I go to lab to see device that store Adrian life.

I made device now to collect sample from inside and not let you air in."

He holds up a large box.

"Put you vacuum chamber in this.

Close this.

This make Adrian air inside."

He opens the top and points to a couple of hinged rods.

"Control these from outside.

Gather sample.

Seal you device.

Open my device.

Have sample.

Do human science with sample."

"Smart,"

I say.

"Thanks."

He gets back to work.

I lie in my bunk.

There are a bunch of things I want to do, but I need to take it slow.

I can't risk another "stupid day"

like yesterday.

I almost ruined the sample and killed Rocky.

I'm smart enough now to know I'm stupid.

That's progress.

"Computer: coffee!"

After a minute, the arms hand me a cup of java.

"Hey,"

I say, sipping my coffee.

"How come you and I hear the same sounds?"

He keeps working on the armatures inside his device.

"Useful trait.

Both evolve.

Not surprising."

"Yeah, but why the same frequencies?

Why don't you hear much higher frequencies than I can?

Or much lower?"

"I do hear much higher frequency and much lower frequency."

Didn't know that.

But I should have figured that was the case.

It's an Eridian's primary sensory input.

Of course he'll have a wider range than I do.

That still leaves one unanswered question, though.

"Okay, but why is there overlap?

Why don't you and I hear completely different frequency ranges?"

He puts the tool in one of his hands down, which leaves two hands still plugging away on his device.

With the newly free hand, he scrapes his workbench.

"You hear this, question?"

"Yes."

"That is sound of predator approaching you.

That is sound of prey running away.

Sound of object touching object very important.

Evolve to hear."

"Ah!

Yes."

It's obvious now that he points it out.

Voices, instruments, birdcalls, whatever-they can all be wildly different sounds.

But the sound of objects colliding isn't going to have much variance from planet to planet.

If I bang two rocks together on Earth, they're going to make the same noise as if I bang them together on Erid.

So we're all selected-for by being able to hear it.

"Better question,"

he says.

"Why we think same speed, question?"

I shift over to lie on my side.

"We don't think at the same speed.

You do math way faster than I can.

And you can remember things perfectly.

Humans can't do that.

Eridians are smarter."

He grabs a new tool with his free hand and gets back to tinkering.

"Math is not thinking.

Math is procedure.

Memory is not thinking.

Memory is storage.

Thinking is thinking.

Problem, solution.

You and me think same speed.

Why, question?"

"Hmm."

I ponder it for a while.

It's a really good question.

How come Rocky isn't a thousand times smarter than me?

Or a thousand times dumber?

"Well...I have a theory for why we're about the same intelligence.

Maybe."

"Explain."

"Intelligence evolves to gives us an advantage over the other animals on our planet.

But evolution is lazy.

Once a problem is solved, the trait stops evolving.

So you and me, we're both just intelligent enough to be smarter than our planet's other animals."

"We are much much smarter than animals."

"We're as smart as evolution made us.

So we're the minimum intelligence needed to ensure we can dominate our planets."

He thinks it over.

"I accept this.

Still not explain why Earth intelligence evolve same level as Erid intelligence."

"Our intelligence is based on the animals' intelligences.

So what is animal intelligence based on?

How smart do animals have to be?"

"Smart enough to identify threat or prey in time to act."

"Yes, exactly!"

I say.

"But how long is that time?

How long does an animal have to react?

How long will the threat or prey take to kill the animal or escape?

I think it's based on gravity."

"Gravity, question?"

He sets the device down entirely.

I've got his undivided attention.

"Yeah!

Think about it.

Gravity is what determines how fast an animal can run.

Higher gravity, more time spent in contact with the ground.

Faster movement.

I think animal intelligence, ultimately, has to be faster than gravity."

"Interesting theory,"

Rocky says.

"But Erid have double Earth gravity.

You and I same intelligence."

I sit up on my bed.

"I bet our gravities are so close to the same, astronomically, that the intelligence needed is almost the same.

If we met a creature from a planet with one one- hundredth of Earth's gravity, I bet it would seem pretty stupid to us."

"Possible,"

he says.

He gets back to work on his gadget.

"Another similarity: You and me both willing to die for our people.

Why, question?

Evolution hate death."

"It's good for the species,"

I say.

"A self-sacrifice instinct makes the species as a whole more likely to continue."

"Not all Eridians willing to die for others."

I chuckle.

"Not all humans either."

"You and me are good people,"

Rocky says.

"Yeah."

I smile.

"I suppose we are."

- Nine days until launch.

I paced around my room.

It was pretty bare, but I didn't mind.

The portable unit was a small mobile home complete with a kitchenette.

Better than most people got.

The Russians had their hands full erecting dozens of temporary shelters a few miles from Baikonur Cosmodrome.

But then, I guess we all had our hands full lately.

Anyway, I'd barely used my bed since we'd arrived.

There just always seemed to be some new issue or problem.

Nothing major.

Just...issues.

The Hail Mary was complete.

Over 2 million kilograms of spacecraft and fuel in a nice, stable orbit-four times the mass of the International Space Station, and put together in one- twentieth the time.

The press used to keep track of the total cost, but around the $10 trillion mark, they gave up.

It just didn't matter.

It wasn't about efficient use of resources anymore.

It was Earth versus Astrophage, and no price was too high.

ESA astronauts had been on the ship for the past few weeks, putting it through its paces.

The test crew reported about five hundred problems that we'd been mopping up for the past few weeks.

None of them were showstoppers.

This was happening.

The Hail Mary was going to launch in nine days.

I sat at the table that served as my desk and shuffled through papers.

I signed off on some and set others aside for Stratt to look at tomorrow.

How did I end up an administrator?

We all had to accept changes to our lives, I guess.

If this was my part to play, then so be it.

I set the papers down and looked out the window.

The Kazakhstani steppes were flat and featureless.

People generally don't build launch facilities next to anything important.

For obvious reasons.

I missed my kids.

Dozens of them.

Hundreds, really, over the course of a school year.

They didn't swear at me or wake me up in the middle of the night.

Their squabbles were usually resolved within a few minutes, either by a teacher-enforced handshake or detention.

And, somewhat selfish, but here it is: They looked up to me.

I missed being that respected.

I sighed.

My kids would have a rough time even if the mission worked.

It would take thirteen years for the Hail Mary to get to Tau Ceti, and (presuming the crew found an answer to our problems) another thirteen years for the beetles to get back to us.

That's over a quarter century before we would even know what to do.

My kids wouldn't be kids anymore when it was over.

"Onward,"

I mumbled, and grabbed the next problem report.

Why was it on paper instead of just an email?

Because Russians do things a certain way and it's easier to work with them than to complain about it.

The report was from the ESA crew about anomalies in Slurry Pump Fourteen of the medical feeding transport system.

Pump Fourteen was only part of the tertiary system and it was still 95 percent effective.

But there was no reason to put up with that.

We still had 83 kilograms of unclaimed launch mass.

I made a note to include a spare slurry pump-it was only 250 grams.

The crew could install it before leaving orbit.

I set the paper aside and saw a brief flash out my window.

Probably a jeep driving on the dirt road that led to the temporary shelters.

I got headlights through my window from time to time.

I ignored it.

The next paper in my stack was all about potential ballast issues.

The Hail Mary kept its center of mass along its long axis by pumping Astrophage around as needed.

But we still wanted to keep things as balanced as possible anyway.

The ESA crew had rearranged several supply bags in the storage compartment to more adequately balance- The window shattered as a deafening explosion shook the room.

Glass shards nicked my face as a shockwave knocked me clean out of my chair.

After that: silence.

And then: sirens in the distance.

I got to my knees, and then to my feet.

I opened and closed my mouth a few times to pop my ears.

I stumbled to the door and opened it.

The first thing I noticed was that the small triplet of steps that once led to my door were several feet away.

Then I saw the freshly disturbed earth between the steps and my door and I understood what happened.

The steps are anchored into the ground with four-by-fours sunk deep like fence posts.

My portable has no such support.

My whole house moved and the stairs stayed put.

"Grace?!

Are you okay?!"

It was Stratt's voice.

Her portable was next to mine.

"Yeah!"

I say.

"What the heck was that?!"

"I don't know,"

she said.

"Hang on."

Shortly after, I saw the bobbing of a flashlight.

She came to me, wearing a bathrobe and boots.

She was already on her walkie-talkie.

"Eto Stratt.

Chto sluchylos'?"

she demanded.

"Vzryv v issledovatel'skom tsentre,"

came the reply.

"The research center blew up,"

she said.

Baikonur was a launch facility, but they did have some research buildings.

They weren't laboratories.

They were more like classrooms.

Astronauts generally spent a week before launch at Baikonur, and they usually wanted to study and prepare right up to launch day.

"Oh God,"

I said.

"Who was there?

Who was there?!"

She pulled a wad of papers from her robe pocket.

"Hang on, hang on..."

She rifled through the papers, throwing each to the ground as she moved on to the next.

I knew what they were at a glance-I'd been seeing them every day for a year.

Schedule charts.

Showing where everyone was and what they were doing at all times.

She stopped when she reached the page she was looking for.

She actually gasped.

"DuBois and Shapiro.

They're scheduled to be there doing some Astrophage experiments."

I put my hands on my head.

"No!

No, please no!

The research center is five kilometers away.

If the blast did this much damage to us here-"

"I know, I know!"

She flicked on her walkie-talkie again.

"Prime crew-I need your locations.

Call them in."

"Yo here,"

came the first reply.

"In my bunk."

"Ilyukhina here.

At officers' bar.

What was that explosion?"

Stratt and I waited for the response we hoped would come.

"DuBois,"

she said.

"DuBois!

Check in!"

Silence.

"Shapiro.

Dr.

Annie Shapiro.

Check in!"

More silence.

She took a deep breath and let it out.

She clicked the walkie- talkie on one more time.

"Stratt to transport-I need a jeep to take me to Ground Control."

"Copy,"

came the reply.

The next few hours were, frankly, chaos.

The entire base was put on lockdown for a while and everyone's ID was checked.

For all we knew, some doomsday cult wanted to sabotage the mission.

But nothing turned up amiss.

Stratt, Dimitri, and I sat in the bunker.

Why were we in a bunker?

The Russians were taking no chances.

It didn't look like a terrorist attack, but they were securing the critical personnel just in case.

Yo and Ilyukhina were off in some other bunker.

The other science leads were in other bunkers as well.

Spread everyone out so there's no single place to attack that would be effective.

There was a grim logic to it.

Baikonur was built during the Cold War, after all.

"The research buildings are a crater,"

said Stratt.

"And there's still no sign of DuBois or Shapiro.

Or the fourteen other staff that worked there."

She pulled up pictures on her phone and showed them to us.

The photos told a story of utter destruction.

The area was lit up with powerful floodlights the Russians had set up and the place was swarming with rescue personnel.

Though there was nothing for them to do.

Virtually nothing was left.

No debris, limited wreckage.

Stratt swiped through photo after photo.

Some were close-ups of the ground.

Round, shiny beads dotted the area.

"What's up with the beads?"

she said.

"Metal condensate,"

Dimitri said.

"It means metals were vaporized, then condensed like raindrops."

"Jesus,"

she said.

I sighed.

"There's only one thing in those labs that could create enough heat to vaporize metal: Astrophage."

"I agree,"

said Dimitri.

"But Astrophage does not just 'explode.' How could this happen?"

Stratt looked at her wrinkled schedule pages.

"According to this, DuBois wanted more experience with Astrophage-powered electrical generators.

Shapiro was there to observe and assist."

"That makes no sense,"

I said.

"Those generators use a tiny, tiny bit of Astrophage to make electricity.

Nowhere near enough to blow up a building."

She put her phone down.

"We've lost our primary and secondary science specialists."

"This is nightmare,"

said Dimitri.

"Dr.

Grace.

I want a short list of possible replacements."

I stared with my mouth agape.

"Are you made of stone or something?!

Our friends just died!"

"Yes, and everyone else will die, too, if we don't make this mission happen.

We have nine days to find a replacement science specialist."

I well up.

"DuBois...Shapiro..."

I snuffled and wiped my eyes.

"They're dead.

They're dead...oh God..."

Stratt slapped me.

"Snap out of it!"

"Hey!"

"Cry later!

Mission first!

You still have that list of coma- resistant candidates from last year?

Start looking through it.

We need a new science specialist.

And we need them now!"

- "Gathering sample now..."

I say.

Rocky watches me from his tunnel in the lab ceiling.

His device works just as it should.

The clear xenonite box has a couple of valves and pumps that let me control the inside environment.

The vacuum chamber is inside with its lid open.

The box even has climate control, keeping the inside temperature a chilly minus 51 degrees Celsius.

Rocky admonished me for leaving the sample at (human) room temperature for so long.

He had a lot to say on that subject, actually.

We had to add "reckless,"

"idiot,"

"foolish,"

and "irresponsible"

to our shared vocabulary just so he could fully express his opinion on the matter.

There was another word he threw around a lot, but he declined to tell me what it meant.

Three days off the painkillers and I'm a lot smarter than I was.

At least he understands that much-I wasn't just some stupid human.

I was a human with enhanced stupidity.

Rocky refused to give me the box I'm using until I slept three times without using the drugs.

My arm hurts so bad right now, but he's got a point.

Rocky healed a fair bit in that time too.

I have no idea what's going on inside his body.

He looks the same as ever, but he's moving around much better than before.

Not full-speed, though.

Neither am I.

We're the walking wounded, honestly.

By agreement, we've kept the gravity at one-half g.

I open and close the claws in the box a few times.

"Look at me.

I'm an Eridian now."

"Yes.

Very Eridian.

Hurry and get sample."

"You're no fun."

I grab the cotton swab and bring it to a waiting glass slide.

I rub it across the slide, leaving a noticeable smear, then return it to the vacuum chamber.

I seal up the chamber, put the slide in a little clear xenonite container, and seal the box.

"Okay.

That should do it."

I turn the valves to let my air in, then open the box from above.

The slide is safe in its xenonite container.

The galaxy's smallest little spaceship.

At least, from the point of view of any Adrian life that may be present.

I walk to the microscope station.

Rocky follows along in the tunnel above.

"You certain you can see light so small, question?"

"Yes.

Old technology.

Very old."

I put the container on the tray and adjust the lenses.

The xenonite is plenty clear enough for the microscope to see through.

"Okay, Adrian, what do you have for me?"

I put my face to the eyepieces.

The most obvious thing is the Astrophage.

As usual, they're jet-black, absorbing all light.

That's expected.

I adjust the backlight and focus.

And I see microbes everywhere.

One of my favorite experiments with the kids is to have them look at a drop of water.

A drop of water, preferably one from a puddle outside, will be swarming with life.

It always goes over well, except for the occasional kid who then refuses to drink water for a while.

"Lots of life in here,"

I say.

"Different kinds."

"Good.

Expected."

Of course there would be.

Any planet that has life will have it everywhere.

That's my theory, at least.

Evolution is extremely good at filling every nook in the ecosystem.

Right now I'm looking at hundreds of unique life-forms, never before seen by humans.

Each one an alien race.

I can't help but smile.

Still, I have work to do.

I pan around until I find a nice clump of Astrophage.

If there's a predator to be had, it'll be where the Astrophage is.

Otherwise it'd be a pretty bad predator.

I flick on the microscope's internal camera.

The image appears on a little LCD screen.

I adjust the screen and set it recording.

"This could take time,"

I say.

"Need to see interaction between-whoa!"

I shove my face back to the microscope to get a better look.

It only took seconds before the Astrophage fell under attack.

Am I incredibly lucky, or is this life-form just that aggressive?

Rocky skittered back and forth above me.

"What, question?

What happen, question?"

The monster lurches toward the clump of Astrophage.

It's an amorphous blob, like an amoeba.

It presses itself against its much-smaller prey and begins to envelop the entire clump of them by oozing around both sides.

The Astrophage wriggle.

They know something is wrong.

They try to escape but it's too late.

They can only sputter a short distance before they stop.

Normally, Astrophage can accelerate to near light speed in seconds, but these can't.

Maybe a chemical excretion by the monster that disables them somehow?

The encirclement completes, and the Astrophage are surrounded.

A few seconds later, the Astrophage become cell- like in appearance.

No longer featureless black, their organelles and membranes are starkly visible in the microscope's light.

They have lost their ability to absorb heat and light energy.

They're dead.

"Got it!"

I say.

"I found the predator!

It ate Astrophage right in front of me!"

"Found!"

Rocky cheers.

"Isolate."

"Yes, I'll isolate it!"

I say.

"Happy happy happy!"

he says.

"Now you name."

I grab a nano-pipette from the supply.

"I don't follow."

"Earth culture.

You find.

You name.

What is name of predator, question?"

"Oh,"

I say.

I'm not feeling creative at the moment.

This is too exciting to take my attention away from.

It's an amoeba from Tau Ceti.

"Taumoeba, I guess."

Taumoeba.

The savior of Earth and Erid.

Hopefully.

- I should have a bolo tie.

Maybe a cowboy hat.

Because I'm a rancher now.

And I'm running about 50 million head of Taumoeba on my ranch.

Once I isolated a few Taumoeba from the Adrian air sample, Rocky built a breeder tank and we let them get to work.

It's just a xenonite box full of Adrian air and a few hundred grams of Astrophage.

As far as we can tell, Taumoeba is very resilient to temperature variations.

Good thing, too, because I let it sit at room temperature that one day.

Drugs are bad.

In retrospect, it makes sense that they'd be robust on temperature.

They live in a negative-51-degree-Celsius environment, and eat Astrophage, which is always 96.415 degrees Celsius.

Hey, everyone likes a hot meal, right?

And boy, do they breed!

Well, I gave them a mother lode of Astrophage to work with.

It's the same as throwing yeast into a bottle of sugar water.

But instead of making booze, we're making more Taumoebas.

Now that we have enough to experiment with, I get to work.

If you take a goat and put it on Mars, what happens?

It dies immediately (and horribly).

Goats didn't evolve to live on Mars.

Okay, so what happens if you put a Taumoeba on a planet other than Adrian?

That's what I want to find out.

Rocky watches from his tunnel above the main worktable as I simulate a fresh new atmosphere in my vacuum chamber.

"No have oxygen, question?"

he asked.

"No oxygen."

"Oxygen dangerous."

He's been a little edgy since his internal organs caught fire.

"I breathe oxygen.

It's okay."

"Can explode."

I pull my goggles off and look up at him.

"There's no oxygen in this experiment.

Calm down."

"Yes.

Calm."

I get back to work.

I turn a valve to let a small bit of gas into the vacuum chamber.

I check the pressure gauge to make sure that- "Again confirm: No oxygen, question?"

I jerk my head up to glare at him.

"It's just carbon dioxide and nitrogen!

Only carbon dioxide and nitrogen!

Nothing more!

Don't ask me again!"

"Yes.

No ask again.

Sorry."

Can't blame him, I guess.

Being on fire sucks.

We have two planets to deal with here.

No, not Earth and Erid.

Those are just the planets we live on.

The planets we care about right now are Venus and Threeworld.

That's where Astrophage is breeding out of control.

Venus, of course, is the second planet in my solar system.

It's about Earth's size with a thick carbon-dioxide atmosphere.

Threeworld is the third planet in Rocky's home system.

At least, Threeworld is what I call it.

The Eridians don't have a name for it, even in their own language.

Just a designation: "Planet Three."

They didn't have ancient people looking up at astronomical bodies and naming them after gods.

They only discovered other planets in their system a few hundred years ago.

But I don't want to say "Planet Three"

all the time, so I've named it Threeworld.

The hardest part about working with aliens and saving humanity from extinction is constantly having to come up with names for stuff.

Threeworld is a tiny little planet-only about the size of Earth's moon.

But unlike our airless neighbor, Threeworld somehow has an atmosphere.

How?

I have no idea.

The surface gravity is only 0.2 g's, which shouldn't be enough.

Yet somehow, Threeworld manages to hang on to a thin atmosphere.

According to Rocky, it's 84 percent carbon dioxide, 8 percent nitrogen, 4 percent sulfur dioxide, and a bunch of trace gases.

All with a surface pressure less than 1 percent of Earth's.

I check the readouts and nod approvingly.

I do a visual inspection of the experiment inside.

I'm pretty proud of myself for this idea.

A thin coat of Astrophage sits on a glass plate.

I coated the plate by shining IR light through the glass and attracting Astrophage from the other side.

It's the same way the spin drive does it.

The result is a uniform layer of Astrophage that's just one cell thick.

Then I seeded the slide with Taumoeba.

As they eat the Astrophage, the currently opaque slide will become more and more transparent.

It's a hell of a lot easier to measure light level than a quantity of microscopic organisms.

"Okay...the chamber has Venus's upper atmosphere duplicated.

As good as I can, anyway."

I figure the breeding zone of Astrophage is based mainly on the air pressure.

Basically, they have to aero-brake from near light speed when they hit the planet.

But being so small that doesn't take very long and of course they gobble up all the heat that's created.

The end result is that Astrophage come to rest when the air is 0.02 atmospheres thick.

So, going forward, that'll be our standard for pressure.

Venus's atmosphere is 0.02 atmospheres at around the 70 kilometer mark, and the temperature there is about minus 100 degrees Celsius (thanks, infinite supply of reference material!).

So that's the temperature I have the Venus analog experiment set to.

Rocky's temperature-control system works perfectly, of course, even down to ultra-low temperatures.

"Good.

Now Threeworld."

"What temperature is Threeworld's air at the 0.02 atmosphere altitude?"

"Minus eighty-two degrees of Celsius."

"Okay, thanks,"

I say.

I move to the next chamber.

It has an identical setup of Astrophage and Taumoeba.

I let in the appropriate gases to simulate Threeworld's atmosphere and temperature at the 0.02-atmosphere pressure area.

I get the relevant information from Rocky's perfect memory.

It's not much different from Venus or Adrian.

Mostly carbon dioxide with some other gases running around.

No surprise there- Astrophage go for the biggest concentration of CO2 they can see.

It's a good thing these planets aren't covered in helium or something.

I don't have any of that aboard.

But carbon dioxide?

That's easy.

I make that stuff with my body.

And nitrogen?

Thanks to DuBois and his preferred method of death, there's a whole bunch aboard.

Threeworld does have some sulfur dioxide, though.

Four percent of the total atmosphere.

It's enough that I didn't want to approximate it away, so I had to make some.

The lab has quite a selection of reagents, but no sulfur dioxide gas.

However, it does have sulfuric acid in solution.

I recovered some copper tubing from a broken cooling coil in the freezer and used it as a catalyst.

Worked like a charm to create the sulfur dioxide I needed.

"Okay, Threeworld's done,"

I say.

"We'll wait an hour and check results."

"We have hope,"

says Rocky.

"Yes, we have hope,"

I say.

"Taumoeba are very sturdy.

They can live in a near vacuum, and they seem comfortable in extreme cold.

Maybe Venus and Threeworld are habitable for them.

They're good enough for Taumoeba's prey, so why not for Taumoeba?"

"Yes.

Things are good.

All is good!"

"Yeah.

For once, everything's going great."

Then the lights go out.

T otal darkness.

No lights.

No monitor glow.

Not even the LEDs on the lab equipment.

"Okay, stay calm,"

I say.

"Stay calm."

"Why not be calm, question?"

Rocky asks.

Well, of course he didn't notice the lights go out.

He doesn't have eyes.

"The ship just shut down.

Everything stopped working."

Rocky scuttles a bit in his tunnel.

"You equipment quiet now.

My equipment still working."

"Your equipment gets electricity from your generator.

Mine's powered by my ship.

All the lights are off.

There's nothing working at all!"

"This is bad, question?"

"Yes, it's bad!

Among other problems, I can't see!"

"Why ship turn off, question?"

"I don't know,"

I say.

"Do you have a light?

Something you can shine through the xenonite into my side?"

"No.

Why would I have light, question?"

I bungle in the darkness, feeling my way around the lab.

"Where's the ladder to the control room?"

"Left.

More left.

Continue...yes...reach forward..."

I get my hand on a rung.

"Thanks."

"Amaze.

Humans helpless without light."

"Yes,"

I say.

"Come to the control room."

"Yes."

I hear him skitter through his tunnel.

I climb up and it's just as dark.

The entire control room is dead.

The monitors are off.

Even the airlock window provides no relief-that part of the ship happens to be facing away from Tau Ceti at the moment.

"Control room also have no light, question?"

says Rocky's voice-presumably from his bulb in the ceiling.

"Nothing-wait...I see something...."

Off in one corner of one panel, there's a small red LED.

Definitely glowing, though not very bright.

I sit in the pilot's seat and squint at the control.

The seat wobbles a bit.

My repair job on it was subpar, but it's anchored back to the floor again, at least.

Instead of the usual flat-panel displays found all over the control room, this one little section has physical buttons and an LCD display nearby.

The light is coming from a button.

Obviously, I push it.

What else would I do?

The LCD display comes to life.

Some highly pixelated text appears, stating: : .

: .

: 100%.

"Okay, how do I use the batteries...?"

I mumble.

"Progress, question?"

"Hang on."

I peer all around the LCD panel until I finally spot it.

A little switch, covered by a plastic safety shield.

It's labeled "Batt."

It'll have to do.

I lift the shield and flick it.

Dim LEDs light up the control room-nowhere near as nicely as the normal lights do.

The smallest control screen-and only that screen-comes to life.

The Hail Mary mission patch shows on the center of the screen and the words "Loading Operating System..."

appear at the bottom.

"Partial success,"

I say.

"My emergency battery engaged.

But my generators are offline."

"Why no work, question?"

"I don't know."

"You air is okay, question?

No power, no life support.

Humans turn oxygen into carbon dioxide.

You will use all oxygen and become harmed, question?"

"It's okay,"

I say.

"The ship's pretty big.

It'll take a long time for the air to be a problem.

It's more important that I find the cause of this failure."

"Machines break.

Show me.

I fix."

Not a bad idea, actually.

Rocky seems to be able to do pretty much anything.

Either he's gifted, or all Eridians are like that.

Either way, I'm incredibly lucky.

Still...how well would he do working on human technology?

"Maybe.

But first I need to figure out why two generators would both die at the same time."

"Good question.

More important: Can you control ship without power, question?"

"No.

I need power to do anything."

"Then, most important: How long until orbit decays, question?"

I blink a couple of times.

"I...don't know."

"Work fast."

"Yeah."

I point at the screen.

"First I have to wait for my computer to wake up."

"Hurry."

"Okay, I'll wait faster."

"Sarcasm."

The computer finishes its boot process and brings up a screen I've never seen before.

I can tell it means trouble, because the word "TROUBLE"

is in large type across the top.

Gone are the pleasant user-interface buttons and widgets from before the blackout.

This screen is just three columns of white text on a black background.

The left is all Chinese characters, the middle is Russian, and the right is English.

I guess under normal operation, the ship changes language based on who is reading the screen.

And this "safe boot" equivalent screen doesn't know who will be reading it so it's in all our languages.

"What is happen, question?"

"This screen came up with information."

"What is wrong, question?"

"Let me read!"

Rocky can be a real pain in the butt when he's worried.

I read the status report.

EMERGENCY POWER: ONLINE BATTERY: 100% ESTIMATED TIME REMAINING: 04D, 16H, 17M SABATIER LIFE SUPPORT: OFFLINE CHEMICAL ABSORPTION LIFE SUPPORT: ONLINE.

!!!LIMITED DURATION, NON-RENEWABLE!!!

TEMPERATURE CONTROL: OFFLINE TEMPERATURE: 22C PRESSURE: 40,071 PA "The ship's keeping me alive, but not doing anything else right now."

"Give me generator.

I fix."

"First I need to find it,"

I say.

Rocky slumps.

"You not know where you ship parts are, question?!"

"The computer has all that information!

I can't remember all that!"

"Human brain useless!"

"Oh, shut up!"

I climb down the ladder to the lab.

The emergency lighting is on in here too.

Rocky follows along in his tunnel.

I reach down, grab my tool bag, and continue onward to the next ladder.

He continues following me.

"Where you go, question?"

"The storage area.

It's the only place I haven't completely searched.

And it's the very bottom of the crew compartment.

If the generator is accessible to the crew, that's where it'll be."

Once in the dormitory, I crawl into the storage space.

My arm hurts.

I climb around to inspect the bulkhead with the fuel bay.

My arm hurts more.

At this point, my arm just always hurts, so I try to ignore it.

But no more painkillers.

They just make me too stupid.

I lie back in the storage compartment and let the pain subside a bit.

There must be access panels in here, right?

I can't remember the exact layout of the ship, but critical equipment is probably inside the pressurized area.

For this very reason.

Right?

How do I find it, though?

I'd need x-ray vision to know where -oh, hey!

"Rocky!

Are there any doors in here?"

He is silent for a moment.

He taps on the wall a few times.

"Six small doors."

"Six?!

Ugh.

Tell me where the first one is."

I put my hand on the compartment ceiling.

"Move hand toward your feet and left..."

I follow his directions to the first door.

Man, they're hard to see.

The emergency lighting in the dormitory is meager to start with, and the small amount getting into the compartment is dismal.

The panel is secured with a simple flat-head screw that controls a latch.

I turn it with a stub screwdriver from my toolkit.

The panel swings open to reveal a pipe with a valve on it.

The label reads .

Definitely don't want to mess with that.

I close the cabinet.

"Next door."

One by one, he leads me to each door and I check what's behind it.

I know he can sonar-sense the shapes behind the doors but that's no good.

I'd rather just look at what's there than have him describe what he senses in our limited shared language.

Behind the fourth door, I find it.

It's a lot smaller than I expect it to be.

The whole cubby is about 1 cubic foot.

The generator itself is in an irregularly shaped black casing and I only know it's a generator because it's labeled as such.

I see two thick pipes with shutoff valves on them, as well as several fairly normal-looking electrical wires.

"Found it,"

I say.

"Good,"

comes Rocky's voice from the dormitory.

"Take out and give to me."

"I want to look at it first."

"You bad at this.

I fix."

"The generator might not survive your environment!"

"Mmm,"

he grumbles.

"If I can't fix it, you can talk me through it."

"Mmm."

The two pipes with shutoff valves must be the Astrophage supply lines.

I look a little deeper into the cubby and find labels.

One is "fuel"

and the other is "waste."

Clear enough.

I use a wrench to unscrew the hose bib on the "waste"

line.

As soon as it comes loose, a dark liquid drips out.

Not much- just what was between the shutoff valve and my end of the hose.

It must be whatever fluid we use to carry away dead Astrophage.

I got some on my hand-it feels slimy.

Maybe it's oil.

It's a good idea, actually.

Any liquid will do, oil is lighter than water, and it won't corrode the pipes.

Next I unscrew the "fuel"

line.

It, too, sloshes brown liquid out.

But this time, it smells awful.

I wince and bury my face in my arm.

"Ugh!

God!"

"What is problem, question?"

Rocky calls out from below.

"The fuel smells bad,"

I say.

Eridians don't have a sense of smell.

But while it took a long time to explain sight to Rocky, smell was easy.

Because Eridians do have a sense of taste.

When you get down to it, smell is just tasting at range.

"Is natural smell or chemical smell, question?"

I take another halting sniff.

"Smells like rotted food.

Astrophage doesn't normally smell bad.

It doesn't normally have an odor at all."

"Astrophage is alive.

Maybe Astrophage can rot."

"Astrophage can't rot,"

I say.

"How could it rot-OH NO!

OH GOD NO!"

I wipe my hand across the foul-smelling gunk, then wriggle out of the compartment.

Then, keeping my gunky hand in the air and not touching anything, I climb up the ladder to the lab.

Rocky clatters along in his tunnel.

"What is wrong, question?"

"No, no, no, no..."

I say with a squeak at the end.

My heart is about to beat right out of my throat.

I think I'm going to puke.

I smear some gunk onto a glass slide and shove the slide into the microscope.

There's no power for the backlight, so I grab a flashlight from the drawer and shine it at the plate.

It'll have to do.

I look through the eyepieces and my worst fears are realized.

"Oh God."

"What is problem, question?!"

Rocky's voice is a full octave higher than normal.

I grab my head with both hands, smearing foul gunk on myself but I don't even care.

"Taumoeba.

There are Taumoeba in the generator."

"They damage generator, question?"

Rocky says.

"Give me generator.

I fix."

"The generator isn't broken,"

I say.

"If there are Taumoeba in the generator, it means there are Taumoeba in the fuel supply.

Taumoeba ate all the Astrophage.

We have no power because we have no fuel."

Rocky raises his carapace so fast he clunks it against the roof of his tunnel.

"How Taumoeba get into fuel, question?!"

"There are Taumoeba in my lab.

I didn't keep them sealed off.

I didn't think to.

Some probably got loose.

The ship has a bunch of cracks, holes, and leaks ever since we almost died at Adrian.

Some small hole in a fuel line somewhere must have let Taumoeba in.

It only takes one."

"Bad!

Bad bad bad!"

I start to hyperventilate.

"We're dead in space.

We're stuck here forever."

"Not forever,"

Rocky says.

I perk up.

"No?"

"No.

Orbit decay soon.

Then we die."

- I spend the whole next day examining the fuel lines I can get to.

It's the same story everywhere.

Instead of Astrophage suspended in oil, it's Taumoeba and (let's call it what it is) a lot of Taumoeba poop.

Mostly methane with a bunch of other trace compounds.

I guess that explains the methane in Adrian's atmosphere.

Circle of life and all that.

There's some live Astrophage here and there, but with the overwhelming population of Taumoeba in the fuel they won't live long.

It's pointless to try to salvage this.

It'd be the same as trying to separate good meat from the botulism infecting it.

"Hopeless,"

I say, slamming the latest fuel sample onto the lab table.

"The Taumoeba is everywhere."

"I have Astrophage on my side of partition,"

Rocky says.

"Approximately two hundred sixteen grams remaining."

"That wouldn't power my spin drive for long.

Thirty seconds or so.

And it probably wouldn't live long enough.

There's Taumoeba everywhere on my side of the partition.

Keep your Astrophage safe on your side."

"I make new engine,"

Rocky says.

"Taumoeba turn Astrophage into methane.

React with oxygen.

Make fire.

Make thrust.

Get to my ship.

Much Astrophage there."

"That's...not a bad idea."

I pinch my chin.

"Use Taumoeba farts to propel ourselves through space."

"No understand word after Taumoeba."

"It's not important.

Hang on, let me do the math...."

I pull up a tablet-the computer screen in the lab is still offline.

I don't remember the specific impulse of methane, but I do know that a hydrogen-oxygen reaction is about 450 seconds.

Call that the best-case scenario.

I had 20,000 kilograms of Astrophage, so pretend that's all methane now.

The ship has a dry mass around 100,000 kilograms.

I don't know if I even have enough oxygen for this reaction, but ignore that for now....

Concentration is a constant struggle.

I'm groggy and I know it.

I type away on the calculator app, then shake my head.

"It's no good.

The ship would get less than 800 meters per second velocity.

We can't escape Adrian's gravity with that, let alone cross 150 million kilometers of the Tau Ceti system."

"Bad."

I drop the tablet on the table and rub my eyes.

"Yes.

Bad."

He clicks along his tunnel to hover above me.

"Give me generator."

I slump my shoulders.

"Why?

What good would it do?"

"I clean and sterilize.

Remove all Taumoeba.

I make tiny fuel tank with my Astrophage.

Seal generator airtight.

Give back to you.

You hook up to ship.

Power restored."

I rub my aching arm.

"Yeah.

It's a good idea.

If the generator doesn't melt in your air."

"If melt, I fix."

A few hundred grams of Astrophage isn't enough to fly around the galaxy, but it's more than enough to power the ship's electrical system for...I don't know...the rest of my life at least.

"Okay.

Yeah.

That's a good idea.

At least we'll have the ship back online."

"Yes."

I trudge to the hatch.

"I'll get the generator."

I really shouldn't be using tools in my state, but I press on.

I go back to the dormitory, get into the crawlspace, and detach the generator.

Or maybe it's the backup generator.

I don't know.

In any event, it turns Astrophage into electricity and that's the point.

I get back into the dormitory proper and put the generator in our airlock there.

Rocky cycles the airlock and brings the generator to his workbench.

Two claws get to work on it right away.

A third points to my bunk.

"I work on this now.

You sleep."

"Make sure you don't get Taumoeba in your Astrophage over there!"

"My Astrophage in sealed xenonite container.

Is safe.

You sleep now."

Everything aches, especially my bandaged arm.

"I can't sleep."

He points more firmly.

"You tell me humans need to sleep eight hours every sixteen hours.

You no sleep for thirty-one hours.

You sleep now."

I sit on my bunk and sigh.

"You make a good point.

I should at least try.

It's been a hard day.

Night.

Whatever.

A hard day's night."

I lie back in the bunk and pull the blanket over me.

"That sentence make no sense."

"It's an Earth saying.

From a song."

I close my eyes and mumble.

"...and I've been working like a dog..."

A moment passes while I drift off...

"Whoa!"

I shoot bolt-upright.

"The beetles!"

Rocky is surprised enough to drop the generator.

"What is problem, question?"

"Not a problem!

A solution!"

I leap to my feet.

"The beetles!

My ship has four smaller ships aboard called beetles!

They're made to take information back to Earth!"

"You tell me this before,"

Rocky says.

"But they use same fuel, correct?

Astrophage all dead now."

I shake my head.

"They use Astrophage, yeah, but each beetle is self-contained and sealed.

They don't share air, fuel, or anything else with Hail Mary.

And each beetle has 120 kilograms of fuel aboard!

We have plenty of Astrophage!"

Rocky waves his arms in the air.

"Enough to get us to my ship!

Good news!

Good good good!"

I wave my arms in the air too.

"Maybe we won't die here after all!

I need to do an EVA to get beetles.

I'll be right back."

I hop off the bunk and head to the ladder.

"No!"

Rocky says.

He skitters over to the partition and taps the divider.

"You sleep.

Human no function well after no sleep.

EVA dangerous.

Sleep first.

EVA next."

I roll my eyes.

"All right, all right."

He points back to my bunk.

"Sleep."

"Yes, Mom."

"Sarcasm.

You sleep.

I watch."

- "This doesn't seem like a good idea anymore,"

I say into my radio.

"Do task,"

Rocky replies mercilessly.

I slept well and woke up ready to face the day.

I had a nice breakfast.

I got some stretches in.

Rocky presented me with a sealed, fully functional generator that will last basically forever.

I installed it and got the ship's power back on without a hitch.

Rocky and I chatted about the best way to use the beetles to get back to the Blip-A.

Everything seemed like a good idea until just this moment.

I stand in the airlock, all suited up for an EVA, looking out onto the vast nothingness of space.

Planet Adrian reflects its pale-green light at me, illuminating the ship.

Then it drifts off out of view.

I'm in darkness.

But not for long.

Because the planet shows up again in the top of my vision twelve seconds later.

The Hail Mary is still spinning.

That's kind of a problem.

The ship has little Astrophage-powered thrusters on the sides to spin up and spin down for the artificial gravity.

They don't work, of course.

They're full of Taumoeba poo just like everything else.

So here I am on another EVA that has to deal with gravity.

But instead of Adrian's gravity, it's centripetal force threatening to fling me off into the void.

One death is as good as another.

So why is this worse than my little Adrian sampler adventure?

Because this time I have to balance on the nose of the ship.

One false move could lead to death.

When I got the sampler, I stayed close to the hull, kept well tethered, and had lots of handholds all around just in case I lost my footing.

But the beetles are stored in the nose of the ship.

The nose is oriented toward the other half of the ship, thanks to the way the centrifuge system works.

That puts the beetles at the "top"

of the crew compartment from the point of view of the centripetal gravity.

I have to get up there, open the nose, and get the little ships out.

All while hoping I don't slip.

There are no tether points at the nose.

So I'll have to clip on to a point lower down.

Which means if I fall, I'll have time to pick up a good head of steam before the tether goes taut.

Will it hold?

If not, the force of the centrifuge will fling me off into space and I'll become Adrian's newest moon.

I quadruple-check the tethers.

I ran two of them, just for safety.

They're firmly anchored to a hard point in the airlock and also to my suit.

They should be able to handle the force if I fall.

"Should."

I step out, grab the top of the airlock, and pull myself upward.

I'd never be able to do this with all my gear on at full gravity.

The angle of the nose cone is shallow enough that I don't slide off.

I check the tethers again, then crawl up the nose toward the top.

The centrifuge action shoves me to the side as I go.

I have to stop every couple of feet and let friction with the hull zero out my lateral motion.

"Status, question?"

"Making progress,"

I say.

"Good."

I reach the nose.

The artificial gravity is weakest here, being closest to the center of rotation.

That's a nice little benefit.

The universe lazily revolves around me every twenty-five seconds.

For half the time, Adrian fills my entire view below.

Then I get a few seconds of Tau Ceti's burning brightness.

Then nothing.

It's a little disconcerting but not too bad.

Just mildly annoying.

The beetle hatch is just where it should be.

I'm going to have to be careful here.

I don't want to damage anything.

This was all designed to be a suicide mission.

They didn't care about the Hail Mary getting home.

The mechanism inside has pyros to blow off this hatch.

Then the beetles can launch and find their way back to Earth.

Good system, but I need this hatch intact for when I go home.

It's all for the aerodynamics.

Yes, aerodynamics.

The Hail Mary has always looked like something out of a Heinlein novel.

Shiny silver, smooth hull, sharp nose cone.

Why do all that for a ship that'll never have to deal with an atmosphere?

Because of the interstellar medium.

There's a teeny, tiny amount of hydrogen and helium wandering around out there in space.

It's on the order of one atom per cubic centimeter, but when you're traveling near the speed of light, that adds up.

Not only because you're hitting a whole bunch of atoms but also because those atoms, from your inertial reference frame, weigh more than normal.

Relativistic physics is weird.

Long story short: I need the nose intact.

The entire panel and pyro assembly is attached to the hull with six hex bolts.

I pull a socket wrench from my tool belt and get to work.

As soon as I unscrew the first bolt, it slides down the slope of the nose cone and falls away into the unknowable distance.

"Um..."

I say.

"Rocky, you can make screws, right?"

"Yes.

Easy.

Why, question?"

"I dropped one."

"Hold screws better."

"How?"

"Use hand."

"My hand's busy with the wrench."

"Use second hand."

"My other hand's on the hull to keep me steady."

"Use third han-hmm.

Get beetles.

I make new screws."

"Okay."

I get to work on the second bolt.

This time I'm very careful.

I stop using the wrench halfway through and do the rest by hand.

The fat fingers of the EVA suit are awful for this.

It takes ten minutes just for this one bolt.

But I get it done and, most important, I don't drop it.

I put it in a pouch on my suit.

Now Rocky will know what I need him to duplicate.

I unscrew the next four bolts with the wrench and let them fall away.

I suppose they'll be in orbit around Adrian for a while, but not forever.

The tiny amount of drag we're getting up here will slow them down bit by bit until they fall into Adrian's atmosphere and burn up.

One bolt remains.

But first, I lift up the opposite corner of the assembly enough to make a finger-width gap.

I slip a tether in through a vacant bolt hole and clip it to itself.

Then I clip the other end of the tether to my belt.

Now I have four different tethers attached to me.

And I like it that way.

I may look like space Spider-Man, but who cares?

I still have two more tethers coiled on my tool belt ready to go if needed.

There's no such thing as too much tether.

I unscrew the final bolt and the assembly slides down the nose.

I let it past me and it halts at the end of the tether.

It bounces a few times and knocks into the hull, then sways.

I look into the compartment.

The beetles are right where they're supposed to be, each in their own cubbies.

The four little ships are identical except for a small engraved name on each bulbous little fuel bay.

They're labeled "John,"

"Paul,"

"George,"

and "Ringo,"

of course.

"Status, question?"

"Recovering beetles."

I start with John.

A little clamp holds it in place, but I easily force it open.

Behind the probe is a compressed air cylinder with a nozzle pointed outward.

That's how they're supposed to be launched.

They'd need to be far away from the ship before they start up their spin drives.

Even an adorable little baby spin drive will vaporize anything behind it.

John comes out pretty easily.

The probe is bigger than I remember-almost the size of a suitcase.

Of course, everything seems bigger when you're holding it on an EVA with awkward gloves.

Ol' John weighs a lot too.

I don't know if I could even lift it in Earth's gravity.

I tie it off to the backup tether, then reach in to get Paul.

- Rocky can work fast when he needs to.

And he needs to.

We're in a questionable orbit around Adrian.

Now that the computers and guidance systems are all back online, I can see the orbit.

It's not pretty.

Our orbit is still highly elliptical, and the closest part of it is way too close to the planet.

Every ninety minutes, we touch the tippy-tippy-top of the atmosphere.

It's barely an atmosphere at that altitude.

Just a few confused air molecules bouncing around.

But it's enough to slow us down just a teeny, tiny bit.

That slowdown makes us dip a little deeper into the atmosphere on the next pass.

You can see where this is going.

We scrape the atmosphere every ninety minutes.

And I honestly don't know how many times we can get away with it.

For some reason, the computer doesn't have models for "oddly elliptical orbits around the planet Adrian."

So yeah.

Rocky is in a hurry.

It takes him just two hours to disassemble Paul and understand most of how he works.

This was no easy task- before we passed Paul into Rocky's area of the ship, we had to make a special "cooling box."

The beetles have plastic parts inside that would melt in Rocky's air.

A big lump of Astrophage took care of that.

Astrophage may be too hot for humans to touch, but it's cool enough that plastic won't melt, and of course it has no problem absorbing the extra heat and keeping things at 96 degrees Celsius.

Paul has a lot of electronics and circuitry inside.

Rocky doesn't follow that too well-Eridian electronics isn't nearly so advanced as Earth's.

They haven't invented the transistor yet, let alone IC chips.

Working with Rocky is like having the world's best engineer from 1950 on the ship with me.

Seems odd that a species could invent interstellar travel before inventing the transistor, but hey, Earth invented nuclear power, television, and even did several space launches before the transistor.

An hour later, he's bypassed all the computer controls.

He doesn't need to understand them to bypass them-it's just a matter of knowing what wires to directly apply voltage to.

He jerry-rigged the spin drive to be activated by an audio-driven remote control.

Pretty much everywhere humans use radio for short-range digital communication, Eridians use sound.

He repeats the process for Ringo and John.

This time it's much faster, because there's no research effort.

That leaves George unmodified.

The little beetles don't have much thrust, so the more of them we use the better, but I have to draw a line somewhere.

I want to keep one safely in reserve, unmodified, ready to fulfill its original mission.

Thanks to Rocky, I might just survive this suicide mission, but there are no guarantees.

The Hail Mary is in bad shape, to say the least.

Several fuel tanks are gone, there's damage and leaks all over the place.

There are Taumoeba sneaking around waiting to eat whatever replacement fuel Rocky gives me.

I can count at least a hundred ways the trip home might fail.

So, before I set out, I'm going to send George on his way with all my findings and some Taumoeba aboard.

I would much rather have kept two in reserve, but we need three beetles to be able to vector the thrust so we can angle the ship whatever direction we need.

Rocky passes the three modified beetles through the dormitory airlock to my side.

"You mount on hull,"

he says.

"Aim forty-five degrees out away from centerline of ship."

"Understand."

I sigh.

Another EVA on a spinning ship.

Yay.

But what else can I do?

We can't zero the rotation without thrust.

The airlock is near the nose, and I need to mount the beetles on the rear section.

And the ship is currently divided into two halves connected by nothing but five cables.

But the designers of the Hail Mary thought of this.

There are loops all along the cables that you can attach a tether to.

I'm getting better at the extremely odd skill set of EVAs in non-zero gravity.

And unlike my death dance on the nose of the ship, the rear has lots of handles.

Mounting the beetles is easy enough.

I attach them to handles on the hull to immobilize them while Rocky's xenonite glue sets and makes a permanent bond.

In the end, I have John, Paul, and Ringo evenly spaced in a ring around the hull, each one angled so their engine points 45 degrees away from the long axis of the ship.

"Beetles set,"

I say into my radio.

"Inspecting damaged area."

"Good,"

Rocky replies.

I make my way to the spot that was ruined by the fuel-tank rupture.

There isn't much to see-I jettisoned the bad tanks at the time.

A rectangle of missing hull plates shows an opening where the tanks once were.

The area surrounding the hole tells a tale of trauma.

Black scorch marks mar the otherwise shiny hull plates.

There's clear and obvious warping on two of the neighboring panels.

"Some panels are bent.

Some have burn marks.

Not too bad."

"Good news."

"Burn marks are odd, don't you think?

Why burn marks?"

"Much heat."

"Yeah, but no oxygen.

This is space.

How did it burn?"

"Theory: Many Astrophage in tanks.

Some probably dead.

Dead Astrophage have water.

Dead Astrophage not immune to heat.

Water and much much heat become hydrogen and oxygen.

Oxygen and heat and hull becomes burn marks."

"Yeah,"

I say.

"Good theory."

"Thank."

I get back across the space rope bridge that is the cabling, then inside the airlock without incident.

Rocky waits for me in his ceiling bulb in the control room.

"All is well, question?"

"Yes,"

I say.

"Controls for John, Paul, and Ringo are good?"

He holds identical control boxes in three of his hands.

Each has a wire leading to a wall-mounted speaker/microphone attached to the hull.

He taps a readout box with a fourth hand.

"Communication established.

All beetles function and ready."

I strap myself into the command chair.

This next bit is going to be uncomfortable.

We put the beetles at 45-degree angles from the ship centerline so we can use them to angle the ship as needed.

It also lets us control the ship's rotation.

But we can only use the beetles when the ship is in one piece.

So first I have to pull the halves together.

Conservation of rotational inertia being what it is, that means the ship is going to spin really fast.

In fact, it'll spin exactly as fast as it was when Rocky had to save me last time.

We haven't gained or lost any inertia in that time.

I bring up the Centrifuge panel on the main control screen.

Well, it's just above the original main screen.

That main screen got wrecked in the Adrian adventure.

But this one's good enough.

"You are ready?"

"Yes."

"The g-forces will be strong,"

I say.

"Easy for you, but hard for me.

I might fall unconscious."

"Unhealthy for human, question?"

There's a hint of quaver at the end.

"A little unhealthy.

If I pass out, don't worry.

Just get the ship stable.

I'll wake when we stop spinning."

"Understand."

Rocky holds the three controls at the ready.

"Okay, here goes."

I put the centrifuge into manual mode and bypass three warning dialogs.

First, I rotate the crew compartment 180 degrees.

Just like last time, I take it slow.

But unlike last time, I have everything battened down.

So as the world turns around and gravity changes directions, the lab and dormitory aren't thrown into disarray.

Now I feel half a g pushing me toward the control panels.

The nose is facing away from the rest of the ship again.

I order all four spools to spool in without regard to ship rotation rate.

The icons on the ship show the contraction as ordered and the force of my body into the restraints increases.

After just ten seconds, the forces are at 6 g's and I can barely breathe.

I gasp and squirm.

"You are not healthy!"

Rocky squeaks.

"Undo this.

We make new plan."

I can't speak, so I shake my head.

I feel the skin of my face stretch away from my cheeks.

I must look like a monster right now.

The periphery of my vision fades to black.

This must be the tunnel vision I've heard about.

It's a good name.

The tunnel gets dimmer and dimmer until eventually it's all black.

I wake up moments later.

At least, I think it's moments later.

My arms float freely and only my restraints keep me from drifting out of my chair.

"Grace!

You are okay, question?"

"Uh."

I rub my eyes.

My vision's blurry and I'm still groggy.

"Yeah.

Status?"

"Rotation rate is zero,"

he says.

"Beetles hard to control.

Correction: Beetles easy to control.

Ship powered by beetles hard to control."

"You got it done, though.

Good job."

"Thank."

I release my restraints and stretch out.

Nothing seems to be broken or wounded other than my burned arm from before.

It actually feels great to be back in zero g.

I'm achy everywhere as a rule.

Lots of physical labor and I'm still recovering from injuries.

Getting that pesky gravity out of the way puts less stress on my body.

I cycle through screens on the monitor.

"All systems are okay.

At least, nothing's damaged further than before."

"Good.

What is next action, question?"

"Now I do math.

A whole lot of math.

I have to calculate the thrust duration and angle to get us back to your ship using the beetles as engines."

"Good."

I came to the meeting on time.

At least, I thought I did.

The email said 12:30.

But when I got there, everyone was already seated.

And silent.

And they were all staring at me.

For the time being, we had a media blackout about the accident.

The whole world was watching this project-their only hope for salvation.

The last thing we needed was for people to know the primary and backup science specialists were dead.

Say what you will about the Russians, they know how to keep a secret.

All of Baikonur was on lockdown.

The meeting room, a simple trailer the Russians had supplied, had a great view of the launch pad.

I could see the Soyuz through the window.

Old technology, to be sure, but easily the most reliable launch system ever made.

Stratt and I hadn't spoken since the night of the explosion.

She suddenly had to head up an ad-hoc disaster inquiry.

It couldn't wait until later-if the accident was caused by some procedure or equipment that was going to be on the mission, we needed to know.

I wanted to be involved but she wouldn't let me.

Someone had to keep dealing with various minor Hail Mary issues being reported by the ESA team.

Stratt stared right at me.

Dimitri fiddled with some papers- probably a design for a spin-drive improvement.

Dr.

Lokken, the fiery Norwegian who designed the centrifuge, drummed her fingers on the table.

Dr.

Lamai wore her lab coat as always.

Her team had perfected a fully automated medical robot and she'd probably be in line for a Nobel Prize someday.

If Earth lived that long.

Even Steve Hatch, the crazy Canadian who invented the beetle probes, was present.

He, at least, didn't look awkward.

He just typed away on a calculator.

He didn't have papers in front of him.

Just the calculator.

Also present were Commander Yo and Engineer Ilyukhina.

Yo looked dour as ever, and Ilyukhina had no drink in her hand.

"Am I late?"

I asked.

"No, you're just in time,"

Stratt said.

"Have a seat."

I sat in the only empty chair.

"We think we know what happened at the research center,"

Stratt began.

"The whole building is gone, but all their records were electronic and stored on a server that handles all of Baikonur.

Fortunately, that server is in the Ground Control Building.

Also, DuBois-being DuBois-kept meticulous notes."

She pulled out a paper.

"According to his digital diary, his plan for yesterday was to test an extremely rare failure case that could happen in an Astrophage-powered generator."

Ilyukhina shook her head.

"Should have been me testing this.

I am responsible for ship maintenance.

DuBois should have asked me."

"What was he testing, exactly?"

I asked.

Lokken cleared her throat.

"One month ago, JAXA discovered a possible failure state for the generator.

It uses Astrophage to make heat, which in turn powers a small turbine with state-change material.

Old, reliable technology.

It runs on a tiny amount of Astrophage-just twenty individual cells at a time."

"That seems pretty safe,"

I said.

"It is.

But if the moderator system on the generator's pump fails, and there's an unusually dense clump of Astrophage in the fuel line right at that moment, up to one nanogram of Astrophage could be put into the reaction chamber."

"What would that do?"

"Nothing.

Because the generator also controls the amount of IR light shined on the Astrophage.

If the chamber temperature gets too high, the IR lights turn off to let Astrophage calm down.

Safe backup system.

But there is a possible edge case, extremely unlikely, that a short in this system could make the IR lights turn on at full power and bypass the temperature safety interlock entirely.

DuBois wanted to test this very, very unlikely scenario."

"So what did he do?"

Lokken paused and her lip wobbled a bit.

She steeled herself and pressed on.

"He got a replica generator-one of the ones we use for ground testing.

He modified the feed pump and IR lights to force that crazy edge case to happen.

He wanted to activate an entire nanogram of Astrophage at once and see how it damaged the generator."

"Wait,"

I said.

"One nanogram isn't enough to blow up a building.

At worst it could melt a little bit of metal."

"Yeah,"

said Lokken.

She took a deep breath and let it out slowly.

"So you know how we store tiny quantities of Astrophage, right?"

"Sure,"

I said.

"In little plastic containers suspended in propylene glycol."

She nodded.

"When DuBois requisitioned one nanogram of Astrophage from the research center's quartermaster, they gave him one milligram by mistake.

And since the containers are the same and the quantities are so small, he and Shapiro had no way of knowing."

"Oh God."

I rubbed my eyes.

"That's literally a million times the heat-energy release than they were expecting.

It vaporized the building and everyone in it.

God."

Stratt shuffled her papers.

"The simple truth is this: We just don't have the procedures or experience to manage Astrophage safely.

If you asked for a firecracker and someone gave you a truck full of plastic explosive, you'd know something was wrong.

But the difference between a nanogram and a milligram?

Humans just can't tell."

We were all silent for a moment.

She was right.

We'd been playing around with Hiroshima-bomb levels of energy like it was nothing.

In any other scenario it would have been madness.

But we didn't have a choice.

"So are we going to delay the launch?"

I asked.

"No, we've talked it over and we all agree: We can't delay the Hail Mary's departure.

It's assembled, tested, fueled, and ready to go."

"It is the orbit,"

Dimitri said.

"It is in tight orbit at 51.6 degrees' inclination so Cape Canaveral and Baikonur can get at it easy.

But is also in shallow orbit which is decaying.

If it does not set out within next three weeks, we have to send entire mission up just to re-boost it to higher orbit."

"The Hail Mary will leave on schedule,"

said Stratt.

"Five days from now.

The crew will have two days of preflight checks, so that means the Soyuz has to launch in three days."

"Okay,"

I said.

"What about the science expert?

I'm sure we have hundreds of volunteers all over the world.

We can give the selectee a crash course in the science they'll need to know-"

"The decision's been made,"

Stratt said.

"Really, the decision made itself.

There's no time to train a specialist in everything they need to know.

There's just too much information and research to learn.

Even the most brilliant scientists wouldn't be able to glean all of it in just three days.

And remember, only about one in seven thousand people have the gene combination to be coma-resistant."

Right around then I got a sinking feeling.

"I think I see where this is going."

"As I'm sure you know by now, your tests came up positive.

You are that one in seven thousand."

"Welcome to crew!"

Ilyukhina said.

"Wait, wait.

No."

I shook my head.

"This is insane.

Sure, I'm up to speed on Astrophage, but I don't know anything about being an astronaut."

"We will train you as we go."

Yo spoke quietly, but with confidence.

"And we will do the hard tasks.

You will be utilized only for science."

"I just mean...come on!

There has to be someone else!"

I looked to Stratt.

"What about Yo's backup?

Or Ilyukhina's?"

"They're not biologists,"

said Stratt.

"They're incredibly skilled people with a nose-to-tail expertise on the Hail Mary, its operations, and how to repair damage.

But we can't train someone in all the cellular biology they need to know in the time we have.

It would be like asking the world's best structural engineer to do brain surgery.

It's just not their field."

"What about other candidates on the list?

The ones that didn't make the original cut?"

"There's no one as qualified as you.

Frankly, we're lucky- lucky beyond our wildest dreams-that you happen to be coma- resistant.

Do you think I kept you on the project for so long because I needed a junior high schoolteacher around?"

"Oh..."

I said.

"You know how the ship works,"

Stratt continued.

"You know the science behind Astrophage.

You know how to use an EVA suit and all the specialized gear.

You've been present for every major scientific or strategic discussion we've had about the ship and its mission-I made sure of it.

You have the genes we need, so I made damn sure you had the skills we need.

God knows I didn't want it to come to this, but here we are.

You've been the tertiary science specialist all along."

"N-No, that can't be right,"

I said.

"There's got to be other people.

Much more talented scientists.

And, you know, people who actually want to go.

You must have made a list, right?

Who's the next candidate after me?"

Stratt picked up a piece of paper in front of her.

"Andrea Cceres, a distillery worker from Paraguay.

She's coma- resistant, and holds a bachelor's degree in chemistry with a minor in cellular biology.

And she volunteered for the mission back during the first call for astronauts."

"Sounds great,"

I said.

"Let's give her a call."

"But you've had years of direct training.

You know the ship and the mission inside and out.

And you're a world-leading expert on Astrophage.

We'd only have a few days to get Cceres up to speed.

You know how I operate, Dr.

Grace.

More than anyone else.

I want to give Hail Mary every possible advantage.

And right now, that's you."

I looked down at the table.

"But I...I don't want to die...."

"Nobody does,"

said Stratt.

"It must be your decision,"

said Yo.

"I will not have someone on my crew who is there against their will.

You must come of your own volition.

And if you refuse, we will bring in Ms.

Cceres and do our best to train her up.

But I urge you to say yes.

Billions of lives are on the line.

Our lives matter little when compared against such tragedy."

I put my head in my hands.

The tears started to come.

Why did this have to happen to me?

"Can I think about it?"

"Yes,"

Stratt said.

"But not for very long.

If you say no, we have to get Cceres here in a hurry.

I want your answer by five ..

tonight."

I stood and shuffled out of the room.

I don't think I even said goodbye.

It's a dark and depressing feeling to have all your closest colleagues get together and decide you should die.

I checked my watch-12:38 ..

I had four and a half hours to decide.

- The spin drives of the Hail Mary are incredibly overpowered for its current mass.

When we left Earth, the ship weighed 2.1 million kilograms-most of it being fuel.

Now the ship only weighs 120,000 kilograms.

About one-twentieth its departure weight.

Thanks to the Hail Mary's relatively low mass, the scrappy little beetles are able to collectively give me 1.5 g's of thrust.

Except that the ship wasn't designed to have a bunch of thrust coming in at 45-degree-angle force pushing arbitrary EVA handles on the hull.

If we fire up the beetles at full power, they'll just rip free of the handles and ride off into the Tauset.

Rocky was mindful of that when he zeroed out our rotation.

Now we have that under control and I can do EVAs in zero g like God intended.

I 3-D print a model of the Hail Mary's internal skeleton and give it to Rocky for his perusal.

In under an hour, he not only has a solution but has fabricated the xenonite struts to implement it.

So I do another EVA.

I add the xenonite supports to the beetles.

For once, everything goes according to plan.

Rocky assures me that the ship can now handle full thrust from the beetles and I don't doubt him for a second.

The guy knows engineering.

I type in a bunch of calculations into a complicated Excel spreadsheet that's probably got errors in it somewhere.

It takes me six hours to put together.

I finally come up with what I think is the right answer.

At least, it should put us close enough that we can see the Blip-A.

Then we can fine-tune our vectors from there.

"Ready?"

I say from the pilot seat.

"Ready,"

Rocky says in his bulb.

He holds the three control boxes in his hands.

"Okay...John and Paul to 4.5 percent."

"John and Paul, 4.5 percent, confirmed,"

he says.

Sure, Rocky could have made controls for me to use, but this is better.

I have to watch the screen closely and pay attention to our vectors.

Best to have someone give their full attention to the beetles.

Besides, Rocky's a ship's engineer.

Who better to run our makeshift engines?

"John and Paul to zero.

Ringo to 1.1 percent,"

I say.

"John and Paul zero.

Ringo 1.1."

We make numerous tweaks to the thrust vectors bit by bit to angle the ship roughly the direction I want.

We finally achieve what I hope is the right direction.

"Here goes nothing,"

I say.

"All ahead full!"

"John, Paul, Ringo 100 percent."

I'm thrown back into my seat as the ship lurches forward, with 1.5 g's of gravity taking over as we accelerate in a straight line (maybe) toward the Blip-A (hopefully).

"Maintain thrust for three hours,"

I say.

"Three hours.

I watch engines.

You relax."

"Thanks, but no time for rest.

Want to use gravity while I can."

"I stay here.

Tell me how experiments go."

"Will do."

I'm shooting for another eleven-day transfer.

It takes 130 kilograms of fuel to make that happen-about a quarter of what the beetles have aboard (if you include George, who is sitting on the lab table full of Astrophage).

That should give us enough left over to correct whatever idiotic mistakes I made in my trajectory math.

We'll get up to cruising speed in three hours, then we'll coast for most of eleven days.

I don't want to deal with spinning up or spinning down the centrifuge.

Yes, it can be done-Rocky proved it when he zeroed us out before.

But it was a delicate process with lots of guessing and opportunities for spinning out of control.

Or worse-getting the cables tangled up.

So, for the next three hours I have 1.5 g's to work with.

After that it'll be zero g for a while.

Time to hit the lab.

I climb down the ladder.

My arm hurts.

But less than it has.

I've been changing the bandages every day-or rather, Dr.

Lamai's medical marvel machine has been doing it.

There's definitely scarring all over the skin.

I'm going to have an ugly arm and shoulder for the rest of my life.

But I think the deeper layers of skin must have survived.

If they hadn't, I probably would have died of gangrene by now.

Or Lamai's machine would have amputated my arm when I wasn't looking.

It's been a while since I had to deal with1.5 g's.

My legs don't approve.

But I'm used to this sort of complaint at this point.

I walk to the main lab table, where the Taumoeba experiments are still in progress.

Every part of them is firmly mounted to the table.

Just in case we have more unexpected adventures in acceleration.

Of course, it's not like I'm short on Taumoeba.

I have a bunch of them where my fuel used to be.

I check the Venus experiment first.

The cooling mechanism whirs slightly, keeping the inside temperature correct for Venus's extreme upper atmosphere.

I originally intended to let the Taumoeba in there incubate for only an hour, but then the lights went off and we had other priorities.

So now it's been four days.

If nothing else, they've had plenty of time to do their thing.

I gulp.

This is an important moment.

The small glass slide inside had a one-cell-thick layer of Astrophage.

If the Taumoeba are alive and dining on Astrophage, light will be able to get through.

The more light I see through that slide, the fewer Astrophage are still alive on it.

I steel myself, take a deep breath, and look inside.

Jet-black.

My breathing becomes unsteady.

I fish a flashlight out of my pocket and shine it from behind.

No light gets through at all.

My heart sinks.

I sidestep over to the Threeworld Taumoeba experiment.

I take a look at the slide in there and see the same thing.

Completely black.

Taumoeba can't survive Venus or Threeworld's environment.

Or, at the very least, they aren't eating.

The pit of my stomach feels like it's going to melt.

So close!

We were so close!

We have the answer right here!

Taumoeba!

A natural predator to the thing that's ruining our worlds!

And it's hearty too.

It can survive and thrive in my fuel tanks, obviously.

But not in Venus or Threeworld's air.

Why the heck not?!

"What you see, question?"

Rocky asks.

"Failure,"

I say.

"Both experiments.

The Taumoeba are all dead."

I hear Rocky punch the wall.

"Anger!"

"All this work!

All of it for nothing.

Nothing!"

I slam my fist to the table.

"I gave up so much for this!

I sacrificed so much!"

I hear Rocky's carapace clunk to the ground in his bulb.

A sign of deep depression.

We're both quiet for a time; Rocky slumped in his bulb and me with my face buried in my hands.

Finally, I hear a scrape.

It's Rocky pulling his carapace off the floor.

"We work more,"

he says.

"We no give up.

We work hard.

We are brave."

"Yeah, I guess so."

I'm not the right guy for this job.

I'm a last-second replacement because the actually qualified people blew up.

But I'm here.

I may not have all the answers, but I'm here.

I must have volunteered, believing at the time that it was a suicide mission.

Doesn't help Earth, but it's something.

- Stratt's trailer was twice the size of mine.

Privileges of rank, I suppose.

Though to be fair, she needed the space.

She sat at a large table covered in papers.

I could see at least six different languages in four different alphabets on the paperwork before her, but she didn't seem to have a problem with any of them.

A Russian soldier stood in one corner of the room.

Not exactly at attention, but not relaxed either.

There was a chair next to him, but he'd apparently elected to stand.

"Hello, Dr.

Grace,"

Stratt said without looking up.

She pointed to the soldier.

"That's Private Meknikov.

Even though we know the explosion was an accident, the Russians aren't taking any chances."

I looked to the soldier.

"So he's here to make sure imaginary terrorists don't kill you?"

"Something like that."

She looked up.

"So.

It's five o'clock.

Have you made your decision?

Are you going to be the Hail Mary's science specialist?"

I sat opposite her.

I couldn't meet her gaze.

"No."

She scowled at me.

"I see."

"It's...you know...the kids.

I should stay here for the kids."

I squirmed in my seat.

"Even if the Hail Mary finds the answer, we're going to have almost thirty years of misery."

"Uh-huh,"

she said.

"And, um, well, I'm a teacher.

I should teach.

We need to raise a strong, solid generation of survivors.

Right now we're soft.

You, me, the whole Western world.

We're the result of growing up in unprecedented comfort and stability.

It's the kids of today that'll have to make the world of tomorrow work.

And they're going to inherit a mess.

I can really do a lot more by preparing kids for the world that's to come.

I should stay here on Earth where I'm needed."

"On Earth,"

she repeated.

"Where you're needed."

"Y-Yeah."

"As opposed to on the Hail Mary, where you could be instrumental in solving the entire problem because you're completely trained for the task."

"It's not like that,"

I said.

"I mean.

It's a little like that.

But look, I'm no good on a crew.

I'm not some intrepid explorer."

"Oh, I know,"

she said.

She clenched her fist and looked to the side for a moment.

Then back to me with a burning gaze I'd never seen before.

"Dr.

Grace.

You're a coward and you're full of shit."

I winced.

"If you really cared so much about the children, you'd get on that ship without hesitation.

You could save billions of them from the apocalypse instead of preparing hundreds of them for it."

I shook my head.

"It's not about that-"

"Do you think I don't know you, Dr.

Grace?!"

she yelled.

"You're a coward and you always have been.

You abandoned a promising scientific career because people didn't like a paper you wrote.

You retreated to the safety of children who worship you for being the cool teacher.

You don't have a romantic partner in your life because that would mean you might suffer heartbreak.

You avoid risk like the plague."

I stood up.

"Okay, it's true!

I'm afraid!

I don't want to die!

I worked my ass off on this project and I deserve to live!

I'm not going, and that's final!

Get the next person on the list-that Paraguayan chemist.

She wants to go!"

She slammed her fist on the table.

"I don't care who wants to go.

I care who's most qualified!

Dr.

Grace, I'm sorry, but you are going on that mission.

I know you're afraid.

I know you don't want to die.

But you're going."

"You're out of your darn mind.

I'm leaving now."

I turned to the door.

"Meknikov!"

she shouted.

The soldier deftly stepped between me and the door.

I turned back to her.

"You have got to be kidding."

"It would have been easier if you'd just said yes."

"What's your plan?"

I jerked a thumb at the soldier.

"Hold me at gunpoint for four years during the trip?"

"You'll be in a coma during the trip."

I tried to dart past Meknikov, but he stopped me with arms of iron.

He wasn't rough about it.

He was just monumentally stronger than I was.

He held me by the shoulders and faced me toward Stratt.

"This is crazy!"

I yelled.

"Yo will never go for this!

He specifically said he doesn't want anyone on his ship against their will!"

"Yeah, that was a curveball.

He is annoyingly honorable,"

Stratt said.

She picked up a checklist that she'd written in Dutch.

"First, you're to be held in a cell for the next few days until the launch.

You'll have no communication with anyone.

Right before launch, you'll be given a very strong sedative to knock you out and we'll load you into the Soyuz."

"Don't you think Yo will be a little suspicious about that?"

"I'll explain to Commander Yo and Specialist Ilyukhina that, due to limited astronaut training, you were worried that you'd panic during the launch so you elected to be unconscious for it.

Once aboard the Hail Mary, Yo and Ilyukhina will secure you into your medical bed and start your coma procedure.

They'll take care of all the pre-launch prep from there.

You'll wake up at Tau Ceti."

The first seeds of panic started to grow.

This lunacy might actually work.

"No!

You can't do that!

I won't do it!

This is insane!"

She rubbed her eyes.

"Believe it or not, Dr.

Grace, I kind of like you.

I don't respect you very much, but I do think you're a fundamentally good man."

"Easy for you to say when you're not the one being murdered!

You're murdering me!"

Tears rolled down my face.

"I don't want to die!

Don't send me off to die!

Please!"

She looked pained.

"I don't like this any more than you do, Dr.

Grace.

If it's any consolation, you'll be hailed as a hero.

If Earth survives this, there'll be statues of you all over the place."

"I won't do it!"

I choked on bile.

"I'll sabotage the mission!

You kill me?!

Fine!

I'll kill your mission!

I'll scuttle the ship!"

She shook her head.

"No, you won't.

That's a bluff.

Like I said, you're fundamentally a good man.

When you wake up, you'll be good and angry.

I'm sure Yo and Ilyukhina will be pretty mad about what I did to you too.

But in the end, you three will be out there and you'll do your job.

Because humanity depends on it.

I'm ninety-nine percent sure you'll do the right thing."

"Try me!"

I screamed.

"Go on!

Try me!

See what happens!"

"But I can't rely on ninety-nine percent, can I?"

She glanced at her paper again.

"I always assumed the American CIA would have the best interrogation drugs.

But did you know it's actually the French?

It's true.

Their DGSE has perfected a drug that causes retrograde amnesia that lasts for long periods of time.

Not just hours or days, but weeks.

They used it during various anti-terror operations.

It can be handy for a suspect to forget he was ever interrogated."

I stared at her in horror.

My throat hurt from yelling.

"Your med bed will give you a nice dose of it before you wake up.

You and your crewmates will just assume it's a side effect of the coma.

Yo and Ilyukhina will explain the mission to you and you'll roll right into getting to work.

The French assure me the drug doesn't erase trained skills, language, or anything like that.

By the time your amnesia wears off, you guys might have already sent the beetles back.

And if not, my guess is you'll be too far invested in the project to give up."

She nodded to Meknikov.

He dragged me out the door and frog-walked me down the path.

I craned my neck back toward the door and screamed, "You can't do this!"

"Just think of the kids, Grace,"

she said from the doorway.

"All those kids you'll be saving.

Think of them."

O h.

Okay.

I see how it is.

I'm not some intrepid explorer who nobly sacrificed his life to save Earth.

I'm a terrified man who had to be literally dragged kicking and screaming onto the mission.

I'm a coward.

All that came to me in a flash.

I sit on the stool and stare at the lab table.

I went from nearly hysterical to...this.

This is worse.

I'm numb.

I'm a coward.

I've known for a while that I'm not the best hope for saving mankind.

I'm just a guy with the genes to survive a coma.

I made my peace with that a while ago.

But I didn't know I was a coward.

I remember the emotions.

I remember that feeling of panic.

I remember it all now.

Sheer, unadulterated terror.

Not for Earth or humanity or the children.

For myself.

Utter panic.

"God damn you, Stratt,"

I mumble.

What ticks me off the most is that she was right.

Her plan worked perfectly.

I got my memory back, and now I'm so committed to the mission I'm still going to give it my all.

Plus, come on, of course I was going to give it my all.

What else would I do?

Let 7 billion people die to spite Stratt?

At some point, Rocky came through his tunnel to the lab.

I don't know how long he's been there.

He didn't have to come- he could "see"

everything going on from the control room with his sonar sense.

Still, there he is.

"You are very sad,"

he says.

"Yeah."

"I am sad also.

But we not be sad for long.

You are scientist.

I am engineer.

Together we solve."

I throw up my arms in frustration.

"How?!"

He clicked along the tunnel to the closest point above me.

"Taumoeba eat all your fuel.

Therefore Taumoeba survive and breed in fuel-tank environment."

"So?"

"Most life no can live outside its air.

I die if not in Erid air.

You die if not in Earth air.

But Taumoeba survive when not in Adrian air.

Taumoeba stronger than Erid life-stronger than Earth life."

I crane my neck to look up at him.

"True.

And Astrophage are also pretty tough.

They can live in vacuum and on the surface of stars."

He tapped two claws together.

"Yes yes.

Astrophage and Taumoeba from same biosphere.

Probably evolve from common ancestor.

Adrian life is very strong."

I sit up.

"Yeah.

Okay."

"You have idea already.

Not question.

I know you.

You have idea already.

Tell idea."

I sigh.

"Well...Venus, Threeworld, and Adrian all have a bunch of carbon dioxide.

The Astrophage breeding zone in all three is where pressure is 0.02 atmospheres.

So maybe I'll start with a chamber full of pure carbon dioxide at 0.02 atmospheres and see if Taumoeba survives that.

Then add in more gases one at a time to see what the problem is."

"Understand,"

says Rocky.

I get to my feet and dust off my jumpsuit.

"I need you to make me a test chamber.

Clear xenonite with valves so I can let air in and out.

Also, I need to be able to set temperature to minus 100 degrees Celsius, minus 50 degrees Celsius, or minus 82 degrees Celsius."

I could use my own equipment, but why not take advantage of superior material and craftsmanship?

"Yes yes.

I make now.

We are team.

We fix this.

No be sad."

He skitters down the tunnel toward the dormitory.

I check my watch.

"The main thrust ends in thirty-four minutes.

After that's done, let's use the beetles to put ourselves in centrifuge mode."

Rocky pauses.

"Dangerous."

"Yeah, I know.

But we need gravity for the lab and I don't want to wait eleven days.

I want to make good use of time."

"Beetles arranged for thrust, not rotation."

It's true.

Our propulsion right now is, to say the least, rudimentary.

We don't have servos or gimbals to vector our thrust.

We're like a sixteenth-century nautical ship, but we're using beetles for sails.

Actually, scratch that.

The nautical ship could at least control the angle of their sails.

We're more like a paddlewheel boat with a broken rudder.

It's not all bad, though.

We have some slight attitude control by deciding how much each engine thrusts.

It's how Rocky zeroed out our rotation before.

"It's worth the risk."

He skitters back up the tunnel to face me.

"Ship will rotate off-axis.

No can unspool centrifuge cables.

Would tangle."

"We'll create the needed rotation first, then shut off beetles, then unspool cables."

He draws back.

"If ship not unspooled, force is too much for human."

That does present a problem.

I want 1 g of gravity for the lab when the ship is fully unspooled in two halves.

To get that much rotational inertia with the ship in one piece means spinning it very fast.

Last time we did that, I passed out in the control room and Rocky almost died saving me.

"Okay..."

I say.

"How about this: I'll lay down in the storage room under the dormitory.

That's the closest to the center of ship I can get.

The force will be smallest there.

I'll be okay."

"How you operate centrifuge controls from storage room, question?"

"I'll...umm...I'll bring the lab's control screen down there with me.

I'll run data and power extension cables from the lab to the storage room.

Yeah.

That should work."

"What if you unconscious and no can operate controls, question?"

"Then you cancel the rotation and I'll wake up."

He shimmies back and forth.

"No like.

Alternate plan: Wait eleven days.

Get to my ship.

Clean out you ship fuel tanks.

Sterilize-make sure no Taumoeba.

Refill with fuel from my ship.

Then can use all functions of you ship again."

I shake my head.

"I don't want to wait eleven days.

I want to work now."

"Why, question?

Why no wait, question?"

He's completely right, of course.

I'm risking my life and maybe the structural integrity of the Hail Mary.

But I can't just sit around for eleven days when there's so much work to do.

How do I explain "impatience"

to someone who lives seven hundred years?

"Human thing,"

I say.

"Understand.

Not actually understand, but...understand."

- The spin-up went as planned.

Rocky selected Ringo to do the spinning work, leaving John and Paul offline.

George is still safely aboard the ship in case I need him.

The g-forces during the spin-up were rough-I won't lie.

But I stayed awake long enough to manually deal with the centrifuge steps.

I'm getting pretty good at it now.

Since then, it's been a nice, level 1 g.

Yeah, it was impatient and a little risky, but thanks to that, I've had seven days of hardcore science since then.

Rocky delivered on the testing apparatus as promised.

As always, everything worked flawlessly.

Instead of a small, annoying glass vacuum chamber, I had something resembling a large fish tank.

Xenonite doesn't care if there's a bunch of air pressure on a large, flat panel.

"Bring it on,"

says xenonite.

I have, shall we say, an inexhaustible supply of Taumoeba.

The Hail Mary is currently the Taumoeba party bus.

All I have to do is open the fuel line that used to lead to the generator when I want more.

- "Hey, Rocky!"

I call out from the lab.

"Watch me pull a Taumoeba out of a hat!"

Rocky climbs up his tunnel from the control room.

"I assume that is Earth idiom."

"Yeah.

Earth has entertainment called 'television' and-"

"Do not explain, please.

You have findings, question?"

Just as well.

It would take a long time to explain cartoons to an alien.

"I have some results."

"Good good."

He hunkers down into a comfortable sitting position.

"Tell findings!"

He tries to hide it, but his voice is just a touch higher in pitch than normal.

I gesture to the lab apparatus.

"This functions perfectly, by the way."

"Thank.

Tell about findings."

"My first experiment was Adrian's environment.

I added Taumoeba and a slide covered in Astrophage.

The Taumoeba survived and ate it all.

No surprise there."

"No surprise.

Is their native environment.

But proves equipment works."

"Exactly.

I did more tests to learn Taumoeba's limits.

In Adrian air, they can live from minus 180 degrees Celsius to 107 degrees Celsius.

Outside that range they die."

"Impressive range."

"Yes.

Also, they can survive in a near vacuum."

"Like your fuel tanks."

"Yeah, but not a total vacuum."

I frown.

"They need carbon dioxide.

At least a little bit of it.

I made an Adrian environment but put argon in instead of carbon dioxide.

The Taumoeba didn't eat anything.

They stayed dormant.

Eventually they starved to death."

"Expected,"

he says.

"Astrophage need carbon dioxide.

Taumoeba from same ecology.

Taumoeba also need carbon dioxide.

How they get carbon dioxide in fuel tanks, question?"

"I had the same question!"

I say.

"So I did a spectrograph of my fuel-bay sludge.

There's a bunch of CO2 gas dissolved into the liquid."

"Astrophage probably have carbon dioxide inside.

Or decomposition creates carbon dioxide.

Some percentage died in fuel tanks over time.

Not all cells are perfect.

Defects.

Mutations.

Some die.

Those dead Astrophage put carbon dioxide in tanks."

"Agreed."

"Good findings,"

he says.

He starts climbing back down.

"Wait.

I have more.

Much more."

He stops.

"More, question?

Good."

I lean against my lab table and pat the tank.

"I made Venus in the tank.

But not quite Venus.

Venus's air is 96.5 percent carbon dioxide and 3.5 percent nitrogen.

I started with just the carbon dioxide.

The Taumoeba were fine.

Then I added the nitrogen.

And the Taumoeba all died."

He raises his carapace.

"All die, question?

Sudden, question?"

"Yes,"

I say.

"In seconds.

All dead."

"Nitrogen...unexpected."

"Yeah, very unexpected!"

I say.

"I repeated experiment with Threeworld's air.

Carbon dioxide only: The Taumoeba were fine.

I added in the sulfur dioxide: The Taumoeba were fine.

I added the nitrogen: Boom!

All the Taumoeba died."

He taps a claw absently on the tunnel wall.

"Very very unexpected.

Nitrogen harmless to Erid life.

Nitrogen required by many Erid life."

"Same with Earth,"

I say.

"Earth's air is seventy-eight percent nitrogen."

"Confusing,"

he says.

He's not alone.

I'm just as baffled as he is.

We're both thinking the same thing: If all life evolved from a single source, how can nitrogen be critical to two biospheres and toxic to a third?

Nitrogen is utterly harmless and nearly inert in its gaseous state.

It's usually content to be N2, which barely wants to react with anything.

Human bodies ignore the stuff despite every breath being 78 percent nitrogen.

As for Erid, their atmosphere is mostly ammonia-a nitrogen compound.

How could a panspermia event ever seed Earth and Erid-two nitrogen- riddled planets-if a tiny amount of nitrogen kills that life?

Well, the answer to that is easy: Whatever the life-form was that caused the panspermia, it didn't have a problem with nitrogen.

Taumoeba, which evolved later, does.

Rocky's carapace sinks.

"Situation bad.

Threeworld air is eight percent nitrogen."

I sit on the lab stool and cross my arms.

"Venus's air is 3.5 percent nitrogen.

Same problem."

He sinks farther and his voice drops an octave.

"Hopeless.

Cannot change Threeworld air.

Cannot change Venus air.

Cannot change Taumoeba.

Hopeless."

"Well,"

I say.

"We can't change Threeworld or Venus's air.

But maybe we can change Taumoeba."

"How, question?"

I grab my tablet from the workbench and scroll through my notes about Eridian physiology.

"Do Eridians have diseases?

Sicknesses inside your bodies?"

"Some.

Very, very bad."

"How does your body kill diseases?"

"Eridian body is closed,"

he explains.

"Only opening happen when eat or lay egg.

After opening seals, area inside made very hot inside with hot blood for long time.

Kill any disease.

Disease can only get into body through wound.

Then is very bad.

Body shut down infected area.

Heat with hot blood to kill disease.

If disease fast, Eridian die."

No immune system at all.

Just heat.

Well, why not?

The hot circulatory system of an Eridian boils water to make the muscles move.

Why not use it to cook and sterilize incoming food too?

And with heavy oxides-basically rocks-as skin, they don't get many cuts or abrasions.

Even their lungs don't exchange material with the outside.

If any pathogens do get in, the body seals the area off and boils it.

An Eridian body is a nearly impenetrable fortress.

But a human body is more like a borderless police state.

"Humans are very different,"

I say.

"We get diseases all the time.

We have very powerful immune systems.

Also, we find cures for diseases in nature.

The word is 'antibiotics.' "

"No understand,"

he says.

"Cures for diseases in nature, question?

How, question?"

"Other life on Earth evolved defenses against the same diseases.

They emit chemicals that kill the disease without harming other cells.

Humans eat those chemicals and they kill disease but not our human cells."

"Amaze.

Erid no have this."

"It's not a perfect system, though,"

I say.

"Antibiotics work very well at first, but then over the years, they become less and less effective.

Eventually they barely work at all."

"Why, question?"

"Diseases change.

Antibiotics kill almost all the disease in the body, but some survive.

By using antibiotics, humans are accidentally teaching diseases how to survive those antibiotics."

"Ah!"

Rocky says.

He raises his carapace a tad.

"Disease evolves defense against chemical that kills it."

"Yes,"

I say.

I point at the tank.

"Now think of Taumoeba as disease.

Think of nitrogen as antibiotic."

He pauses, then raises his carapace back to its proper location.

"Understand!

Make environment barely deadly.

Breed Taumoeba that survive.

Make more deadly.

Breed survivors.

Repeat, repeat, repeat!"

"Yes,"

I say.

"We don't need to understand why or how nitrogen kills Taumoeba.

We just need to breed nitrogen- resistant Taumoeba."

"Yes!"

he says.

"Good!"

I slap the top of the tank.

"Make me ten of these, but smaller.

Also provide a way for me to get Taumoeba samples without interrupting the experiment.

Make a very accurate gas injection system-I need exact control over the nitrogen quantity in the tank."

"Yes!

I make!

I make now!"

He skitters down to the dormitory.

- I check the results of the spectrograph and shake my head.

"No good.

Complete failure."

"Sad,"

Rocky says.

I put my chin in my hands.

"Maybe I can filter out the toxins."

"Maybe you can concentrate on Taumoeba."

There's a special warble that Rocky does when he's being snarky.

That warble is especially present right now.

"They're coming along fine."

I glance over to the Taumoeba processing tanks arrayed along one side of the lab.

"Nothing to do but wait.

We've had good results.

They're already up to 0.01 percent nitrogen and surviving.

The next generation might be able to go as high as 0.015."

"This is waste of time.

Also waste of my food."

"I need to know if I can eat your food."

"Eat your own food."

"I've only got a few months of real food left.

You have enough aboard your ship to feed a crew of twenty-three Eridians for years.

Erid life and Earth life use the same proteins.

Maybe I can eat your food."

"Why you say 'real food,' question?

What is non-real food, question?"

I checked the readout again.

Why does Eridian food have so many heavy metals in it?

"Real food is food that tastes good.

Food that's fun to eat."

"You have not-fun food, question?"

"Yeah.

Coma slurry.

The ship fed it to me during the trip here.

I have enough to last me almost four years."

"Eat that."

"It tastes bad."

"Food experience not that important."

"Hey."

I point at him.

"To humans, food experience is very important."

"Humans strange."

I point at the spectrometer readout screen.

"Why does Eridian food have thallium in it?"

"Healthy."

"Thallium kills humans!"

"Then eat human food."

"Ugh."

I walk over to the Taumoeba tanks.

Rocky had outdone himself.

I can control the nitrogen content to within one part per million.

And so far, things are looking good.

Sure, this generation can only handle a smidgen of nitrogen, but it's a smidgen more than the previous generation could do.

The plan is working.

Our Taumoeba are developing nitrogen resistance.

Will they ever be able to handle the 3.5 percent needed for Venus?

Or the 8 percent for Threeworld?

Who knows?

We'll just have to wait and see.

I'm using percentages here to track the nitrogen.

I can only get away with that because in all cases, Astrophage breed where the air is 0.02 atmospheres of pressure.

So, since the pressure is always the same across all experiments, I can just track the percent of nitrogen.

The proper way to do it would be to track "partial pressure."

But that's annoying.

I'd just end up dividing by 0.02 atmospheres and multiplying by it again later when dealing with data.

I pat the top of Tank Three.

It's been my lucky tank.

Out of twenty-three generations of Taumoeba, Tank Three made the strongest strain nine times.

Pretty good, considering she's got nine other tanks to compete with.

Yes, Tank Three is a "she."

Don't judge me.

"How long until we reach the Blip-A?"

"Seventeen hours until reverse-thrust maneuver."

"Okay, let's spin down the centrifuge now.

Just in case we run into trouble and need extra time to fix something."

"Agree.

I go to control room now.

You go to storage locker and lie flat.

Do not forget control panel with long extension cords."

I glance around the lab.

Everything is firmly secured.

"Yeah, okay.

Let's do it."

- "John, Ringo, Paul off,"

says Rocky.

"Velocity is orbital."

There is no "stationary"

in a solar system.

You're always moving around something.

In this case, Rocky reduced our cruise velocity to put us in a stable orbit about 1 AU from Tau Ceti.

That's where he left the Blip-A.

Rocky relaxes in his control-room bulb.

He clamps the boxes to their wall mounts.

Now that the engines are off we're back to zero g, and the last thing we want is for the "make ship thrust"

button to be floating around unattended.

He grabs a couple of handholds and centers his carapace over the texture monitor.

As always, it shows him my center monitor feed with colors represented as textures.

"You in control now."

He's done his job.

Now it's my turn.

"How long until the flash?"

I ask Rocky pulls an Eridian clock off the wall.

"Next flash is three minutes, seven seconds."

"Okay."

Rocky's no dope.

He left his ship set up to turn on its engines for a fraction of a second every twenty minutes or so, giving us a much-needed beacon.

It's easy enough to math out where the ship should be.

But gravity from other planets, inaccurate measurement of last known velocities, inaccuracies in our estimate of Tau Ceti's gravity...they all add up to make slight errors.

And a slight error on the location of something orbiting a star is a pretty big distance.

So rather than hoping we can see Taulight reflect off the ship when we get to where it should be, he just set it up to flash the engines now and then.

All I have to do is watch with the Petrovascope.

It'll be an extremely bright flash.

"What is current nitrogen tolerance, question?"

"Tank Three had some survivors at 0.6 percent nitrogen today.

I'm breeding them up now."

"What spacing, question?"

It's a conversation we've had dozens of times.

But it's fair for him to be curious.

His species depends on it.

The "spacing,"

as we've come to call it, is the difference in how much nitrogen each of the ten tanks receives.

I don't just do the same thing in every tank.

With each new generation, I try ten new percentages of nitrogen.

"I'm being aggressive-0.05 percent increments."

"Good good,"

he says.

All ten tanks are breeding Taumoeba-06 (named for the nitrogen percent it can withstand).

Tank One is the control, as always.

It has 0.6 percent nitrogen in the air.

Taumoeba-06 should have no problem in there.

If it does, it means there was a mistake in the previous batch and I have to go back to an earlier strain.

Tank Two has 0.65 percent nitrogen.

Tank Three has 0.7.

And so on all the way up to Tank Ten with 1.05 percent.

The heartiest survivors will be the champions, and will move on to the next round.

I wait a few hours just to make sure they can breed for at least two generations.

Taumoeba has a ridiculously fast doubling time.

Fast enough to eat all my fuel in a matter of days, as it happens.

If we get to Venus or Threeworld nitrogen percentages, I'll do much more thorough testing.

"Flash is soon,"

Rocky says.

"Copy."

I bring up the Petrovascope on the center monitor.

Normally, I'd have it off to the side, but the center is the only one Rocky can "see."

As expected, there's just background light in the Petrova frequency courtesy of Tau Ceti.

I pan and tilt the camera.

We deliberately positioned ourselves closer to Tau Ceti than the Blip-A should be.

So I'm looking more or less directly away from the star.

That should minimize the background IR and give me a good view of the flash.

"Okay.

I think I have it pointed roughly toward your ship."

Rocky concentrates on his texture monitor.

"Understand.

Thirty-seven seconds until flash."

"Hey.

What's is your ship's name, anyway?"

"Blip-A."

"No, I mean, what do you call it?"

"Ship."

"Your ship has no name?"

"Why would ship have name, question?"

I shrugged.

"Ships have names."

He points to my pilot's seat.

"What is name of you chair, question?"

"It doesn't have a name."

"Why does ship have name but chair no have name, question?"

"Never mind.

Your ship is the Blip-A."

"That is what I said.

Flash in ten seconds."

"Copy."

Rocky and I each fall silent and stare at our respective screens.

It took me a long time to notice the subtleties, but I can now tell when Rocky is paying attention to something specific.

He tends to angle his carapace toward it and pivot ever so slightly back and forth.

If I follow the line he's pivoting on, that's usually what he's examining.

"Three...two...one...now!"

Right on cue, a few pixels on-screen blink white.

"Got it,"

I say.

"I not notice."

"It was dim.

We must be far away.

Hang on..."

I switch to the Telescope screen and pan to where the flash came from.

I sweep back and forth with small movements until I catch a slight discoloration in the blackness.

Taulight reflecting off the Blip-A.

"Yeah, we're pretty far away."

"Beetles have much fuel remaining.

Is okay.

Tell me angle change."

I check the readouts at the bottom of the screen.

All we have to do is align the Hail Mary with the current telescope angle.

"Rotate yaw plus 13.72 degrees.

Rotate pitch minus 9.14 degrees."

"Yaw plus one three mark seven two.

Pitch minus nine mark one four."

He grabs the beetle controls from their holders and gets to work.

By flicking on and off the beetles in sequence, he angles the ship toward the Blip-A.

I zero the telescope and zoom in to confirm.

The difference between background space and the ship is so small as to be barely perceivable.

But it's there.

"Angle correct."

He focuses hard on his texture screen.

"I no detect anything on-screen."

"Light difference is very very small.

Need human eyes to detect.

Angle is good."

"Understand.

What is range, question?"

I switch to the Radar screen.

Nothing.

"Too far for my radar to see.

At least ten thousand kilometers."

"Accelerate to what velocity, question?"

"How about...three kilometers per second?

Will get to the Blip-A in an hour or so."

"Three thousand meters per second.

Standard acceleration rate is acceptable, question?"

"Yes.

Fifteen meters per second per second."

"Two hundred second thrust.

Begin now."

I brace for gravity.

W e did it!

We actually did it!

I have Earth's salvation in a little tank on the floor.

"Happy!"

Rocky says.

"Happy happy happy!"

I'm so giddy I might throw up.

"Yes!

But we're not done yet."

I strap myself into my bunk.

A pillow tries to float away, but I snag it in time and wedge it under my head.

I'm all wired up, but if I don't go to sleep soon, Rocky will start hassling me.

Sheesh-you almost ruin a mission one time and all of a sudden you have an alien-enforced bedtime.

"Taumoeba-35!"

Rocky says.

"Took many many generations but finally success!"

It's a weird feeling, scientific breakthroughs.

There's no Eureka moment.

Just a slow, steady progression toward a goal.

But man, when you get to that goal it feels good.

We linked the ships back up together weeks ago.

Rocky was pretty stoked to have access to his much larger ship again.

First thing he did was set up a tunnel directly from his portion of the Hail Mary to the Blip-A.

It meant another hole in my hull, but at this point I trust Rocky to do any engineering task.

Heck, if he wanted to do open-heart surgery on me, I'd probably let him.

The guy is amazing at this stuff.

With the ships linked, I can't have the Hail Mary's centrifuge going, which means we're back to zero g.

But now that we're just breeding Taumoeba in tanks, I can live without my gravity- dependent lab equipment for now.

Over the weeks, we watched generation after generation of Taumoeba become more and more nitrogen-resistant.

And now, today, we finally have Taumoeba-35: a strain of Taumoeba that can survive 3.5 percent nitrogen in a 0.02 atmosphere overall air pressure-the same situation found on Venus.

"You.

Be happy now,"

Rocky says from his workbench.

"I am, I am,"

I say.

"But we need to get to 8 percent so it can survive on Threeworld.

Until then, we're not done."

"Yes yes yes.

But this is moment.

Important moment."

"Yeah."

I smile.

He fiddles with some kind of new gadget.

He's always working on one thing or another.

"Now you make exact Venus atmosphere in one tank and do detailed tests on Taumoeba-35, question?"

"No,"

I say.

"We'll keep going until we get to Taumoeba-80.

It should work on Venus and Threeworld.

I'll test everything then."

"Understand."

I turn to face his side of the room.

The whole "watching me sleep"

thing doesn't creep me out anymore.

If anything, it's comforting.

"What are you working on?"

The device is clamped to his workbench to keep it from drifting away.

He works on it from many angles with many hands holding many tools.

"This is Earth electricity unit."

"You're making a power converter?"

"Yes.

Convert from Eridian prime-sequence electric amplitude to inefficient Earth direct-current system."

"Prime sequence?"

"Would take long time to explain."

I make a mental note to ask about it later.

"Okay.

What will you use that for?"

He puts down two tools and picks up three more.

"If all plans work, we make good Taumoeba.

I give you fuel.

You go Earth and I go Erid.

We say goodbye."

"Yeah, I guess,"

I mumble.

I should be happier about surviving a suicide mission, returning home a hero, and saving my entire species.

But saying goodbye to Rocky forever will be hard.

I put it out of my mind.

"You have many portable thinking machines.

I ask favor: You give one to me as gift, question?"

"A laptop?

You want a laptop?

Sure, I have a bunch of them."

"Good good.

And thinking machine have information, question?

Science information from Earth, question?"

Ah, of course.

I'm an advanced alien race with knowledge far beyond Eridian science.

I think the laptops have terabyte drives.

I could copy the entire contents of Wikipedia over to him.

"Yes.

I can do that.

But I don't think a laptop will work in Eridian air.

Too hot."

He points to the device.

"This is just one part of thinking- machine life-support system.

System will give power, keep Earth temperature, Earth air inside.

Many redundant backups.

Make sure thinking machine not break.

If break, no Eridian can fix."

"Ah, I see.

How will you read the output?"

"Camera inside convert from Earth light readout to Eridian texture readout.

Like camera in control room.

Before we leave, you explain written language to me."

He certainly knows enough English to look up any words he doesn't know.

"Yeah, sure.

Our written language is easy.

Kind of easy.

There are only twenty-six letters, but many strange ways to say them.

Well, I guess there are actually fifty-two symbols because capital letters look different even though they're pronounced the same.

Oh, and then there's punctuation..."

"Our scholars will solve.

You just get me started."

"Yes.

I'll do that,"

I say.

"I want a gift from you too: xenonite.

Solid form and liquid pre-xenonite form.

Earth scientists will want that."

"Yes, I give."

I yawn.

"I'm going to sleep soon."

"I watch."

"Good night, Rocky."

"Good night, Grace."

I fall asleep easier than I have in weeks.

I have Taumoeba that can save Earth.

Modifying an alien life-form.

What could possibly go wrong?

- Back when I was a kid, like most kids, I imagined what it would be like to be an astronaut.

I imagined flying through space in a rocket ship, meeting aliens, and just generally being awesome.

What I didn't imagine was cleaning out sewage tanks.

But that's pretty much what I'm doing today.

To be clear, it's not my poop I'm cleaning.

It's Taumoeba poop.

Thousands of kilograms of Taumoeba poop.

Each of my seven remaining fuel bays has to be cleared out of all that gunk before I can put new fuel in.

So, on the one hand, I'm shoveling poop.

On the other, at least I'm in an EVA suit while I do it.

I've smelled this stuff before.

It's not great.

The gunky methane and decomposing cells aren't a problem.

If that were all I had to deal with, I'd just ignore it.

Twenty thousand kilograms of gunk in a two-million-kilogram tank?

Barely worth paying attention to.

The problem is there's probably surviving Taumoeba in there.

The contamination ate all the available fuel several weeks ago, so they've mostly starved by now.

At least, according to recent samples I checked.

But some of the little bastards will probably still be alive.

And the last thing I want to do is feed them 2 million kilograms of fresh Astrophage.

"Progress, question?"

Rocky radios.

"Almost done with Fuel Bay Three."

Fully inside the tank, I scrape black gunk off the walls with a homemade spatula and fling it out through a one-meter-wide hole in the side.

Where'd the one-meter-wide hole come from?

I made it.

The fuel tanks have no human-sized entry hatches.

Why would they?

Valves and piping lead in and out, but the largest of them is only a few inches wide.

I don't have anything to flush the tanks with-I left my "ten thousand gallons of water"

collection back home.

So for each tank I have to cut a hole, clean the gunk out, and then reseal it.

I have to say, though, the cutting torch Rocky made for me works like a charm.

A little Astrophage, an IR light, some lenses, and I have a freakin' death ray in my hands.

The trick is keeping the output low.

But Rocky put extra safeties in.

He made sure the lenses had some impurities and they aren't made of transparent xenonite.

They're IR-permeable glass.

If the light output from the Astrophage inside gets too high, the lenses will melt.

Then the beam will defocus and the cutter will be useless.

I'd have to sheepishly ask Rocky to make me another one, but at least I wouldn't cut my leg off.

So far, that hasn't happened.

But I wouldn't put it past me.

I scrape a particularly stubborn crust of gunk off the wall.

It floats away and I use the scraper to bat it out the hole.

"Status on breeder tanks?"

I ask.

"Tank Four still have live Taumoeba.

Tank Five and higher all dead."

I shuffle forward in the tank.

It's narrow enough that I can hold position by putting both boots on one side of the cylinder and a hand on the opposing side.

This leaves my remaining hand free to scrape sludge.

"Tank Four was 5.25 percent, right?"

"Not right.

Five point two zero percent."

"Okay.

So we're up to Taumoeba-52.

Doin' good."

"How is progress, question?"

"Slow and steady,"

I say.

I flick a wad of gunk off into the void.

I wish I could just flush the tanks with nitrogen and call it a day.

After all, this Taumoeba has no nitrogen resistance at all.

But it wouldn't work.

The gunk is several centimeters thick.

No matter how much nitrogen I pumped in, there would be some Taumoeba it doesn't get to-shielded by a centimeter-thick wall of their brethren.

All it takes is one survivor to start an infestation when I refill the tanks with Rocky's spare Astrophage.

So I have to muck the tanks out as best I can before doing the nitrogen cleanse.

"You fuel tanks are big.

You have enough nitrogen, question?

I can give ammonia from Blip-A life support if you need."

"Ammonia wouldn't work,"

I say.

"Taumoeba doesn't have a problem with nitrogen compounds.

Just with elemental N2.

But don't worry, I'm fine.

I don't need as much nitrogen as you think.

We know 3.5 percent at 0.02 atmospheres will kill natural Taumoeba.

That's a partial pressure of less than 1 Pascal.

These fuel bays are only 37 cubic meters each.

All I need to do is to squirt a few grams of nitrogen gas in here and it'll kill everything.

It's amazingly deadly to Taumoeba."

I put my hands on my hips.

An awkward pose in the EVA suit and it causes me to float away from the wall, but it fit the situation.

"Okay.

Done with Fuel Bay Three."

"You want xenonite patch for hole now, question?"

I float out of the fuel bay and into space.

I pull on my tether to bring me back to the hull.

"No, I'll do all the cleaning first, then close them up in a separate EVA."

I use the handholds to get to Fuel Bay Four, anchor myself in place, and fire up the Eridian AstroTorch.

- Xenonite makes for some pretty darn good pressurized gas containers.

My fuel bays are all freshly cleaned and resealed.

I gave them all about a hundred times as much nitrogen as it takes to kill any natural Taumoeba hanging around.

And then I just let it stay there for a while.

I'm taking no chances.

After a few days of sterilizing, it's time for a test.

Rocky gives me a few kilograms of Astrophage to work with.

I remember when "a few kilograms of Astrophage"

would have been a godsend to everyone on Stratt's Vat.

But now it's just, "Oh hey.

Here's a few quadrillion Joules of energy.

Let me know if you want more."

I divide the Astrophage into seven roughly equal blobs, vent the nitrogen, and squirt one blob into each fuel bay.

Then I wait a day.

During this time, Rocky is aboard his ship plugging away on a pumping system to transfer Astrophage from his fuel tanks to mine.

I offer to help, but he very politely declines.

What good could I do aboard the Blip-A anyway?

My EVA suit can't handle the environment in there, so Rocky would have to build me a whole tunnel system...it's not worth it.

I really want it to be worth it.

It's an alien freakin' spaceship!

I want to see the inside!

But yeah.

Got to save humanity and stuff.

That's the priority.

I check the fuel bays.

Any live Taumoeba will have found the Astrophage and snacked on it.

So if the Astrophage is still there, the bay is sterile.

Long story short: Two of the seven bays weren't sterile.

"Hey, Rocky!"

I yell from the control room.

He's aboard the Blip-A somewhere, but I know he can hear me.

He can always hear me.

After a few seconds, the radio crackles to life.

"What, question?"

"Two fuel bays still have Taumoeba."

"Understand.

Not good.

But not bad.

Other five are clean, question?"

I steady myself with a handhold in the control room.

It's easy to float off when you're concentrating on conversation.

"Yeah, the other five seem good."

"How Taumoeba in bad two bays survive, question?"

"I probably didn't clean them well enough.

Some gunk remained and shielded live Taumoeba from the nitrogen.

That's my guess."

"Plan, question?"

"I'm going back into those two, scraping them down some more, and I'll sterilize them again.

I'll leave the other five sealed for now."

"Good plan.

Do not forget to purge fuel lines."

With all the tanks infected, it's safe to assume the fuel lines (currently sealed off) will also be infected.

"Yes.

They'll be easier than the tanks.

I just need to blow high-pressure nitrogen through them.

It'll clean out the chunks and sterilize the rest.

Then I'll test them the same as the fuel bays."

"Good good."

He says.

"What is status of breeder tanks, question?"

"Still making good progress.

We're up to Taumoeba-62 now."

"Someday we find out why nitrogen was problem."

"Yeah, but that's for other scientists.

We just need Taumoeba-80."

"Yes.

Taumoeba-80.

Maybe Taumoeba-86.

Safety."

When you think in base six, arbitrarily adding six to things is normal.

"Agreed,"

I say.

I enter the airlock and climb into the Orlan EVA suit.

I grab the AstroTorch and attach it to my tool belt.

I turn on the helmet radio and say, "Beginning EVA."

"Understand.

Radio if problem.

Can help with my ship hull robot if you need."

"I shouldn't need it, but I'll let you know."

I seal the door behind me and start the airlock cycle.

- "Screw it,"

I say.

I press the final confirmation button to jettison Fuel Bay Five.

The pyros pop and the empty tank floats off into the nothingness of space.

No amount of scrubbing, cleaning, nitrogen-purging, or anything else could get the Taumoeba out of Fuel Bay Five.

No matter what I did, they survived and chowed down on the test Astrophage I put in afterward.

At a certain point, you just have to let go.

I cross my arms and slump into my pilot's seat.

There's no gravity to properly slump with, so I have to make a conscious effort to push myself into the seat.

I'm pouting, darn it, and I intend to do it right.

I'm missing a total of three of my original nine fuel bays.

Two from our adventure over Adrian, and another one just now.

That's about 666,000 kilograms of fuel storage I no longer have.

Do I have enough fuel to get home?

Sure.

Any amount of fuel that can make me escape Tau Ceti's gravity is enough to eventually get home.

I could get home with just a few kilograms of Astrophage if I didn't mind waiting a million years.

It's not about getting there.

It's about how long it'll take.

I do a ton of math and I get answers I don't like.

The trip from Earth to Tau Ceti took three years and nine months.

And it was done by accelerating constantly at 1.5 g's the entire time-which is what Dr.

Lamai decided was the maximum sustained g-force a human should be exposed to for almost four years.

Earth experienced something like thirteen years during that time, but time dilation worked in our favor for the crew.

If I do the long trip home with just 1.33 million kilograms of fuel (which is all my remaining tanks can hold), the most efficient course is a constant acceleration of 0.9 g's.

I'd be going slower, which means less time dilation, which means I experience more time.

All told, I'll experience five and a half years on that trip.

So what?

It's only an extra year and a half.

What's the big deal?

I don't have that much food.

This was a suicide mission.

They gave us food to last several months, and that's about it.

I've been working my way through the food stores at a reasonable rate, but then I'll have to rely on coma slurry.

It won't taste good but it's nutritionally balanced, at least.

But again, this was a suicide mission.

They didn't give us enough coma slurry to get home either.

The only reason I have any at all is because Commander Yo and Specialist Ilyukhina died en route.

All told, I have three months of real food left and about forty months' worth of coma slurry.

That works out to be just barely enough food to survive the trip home with full fuel and a bit to spare.

But nowhere near enough to last the five and a half years of a slower trip.

Rocky's food is useless to me.

I've tested it over and over.

It's chock-full of heavy metals ranging from "toxic"

to "highly toxic."

There are useful proteins and sugars in there that my biology would love to make use of, but there's just no way to sort out the poison from the food.

And there's nothing here for me to grow.

All my food is freeze-dried or dehydrated.

No viable seeds or plants or anything.

I can eat what I have and that's it.

Rocky clicks along his tunnel to the control-room bulb.

He goes in and out of the Blip-A so often now I often don't know what ship he's on.

"You make angry sound.

Why, question?"

"I'm missing a third of my fuel bays.

The trip home will take more time than I have food."

"How long since last sleep, question?"

"Huh?

I'm talking about fuel here!

Stay focused!"

"Grumpy.

Angry.

Stupid.

How long since last sleep, question?"

I shrug.

"I don't know.

I've been working on the breeder tanks and fuel bays...I forget when I last slept."

"You sleep.

I watch."

I gesture violently to the console.

"I have a serious problem here!

I don't have enough fuel storage to survive the trip home!

It's 600,000 kilograms of fuel.

It would take 135 cubic meters of storage!

I don't have that much space!"

"I make storage tank."

"You don't have enough xenonite for that!"

"Don't need xenonite.

Any strong material will do.

Have much metal aboard my ship.

Melt, shape, make tank for you."

I blink a couple of times.

"You can do that?"

"Obvious I can do that!

You are stupid right now.

You sleep.

I watch and also design replacement tank.

Agree, question?"

He starts down the tube toward the dormitory.

"Huh..."

"Agree, question?!"

he says, louder.

"Yeah..."

I mumble.

"Yeah, okay..."

- I've done a lot of EVAs now.

But none were as tiring as this one has turned out to be.

I've been out here for six hours.

The Orlan is a tough old suit and it can handle it.

The same can't be said about me.

"Installing final fuel bay now,"

I wheeze.

Almost there.

Stay on target.

Rocky's ad-hoc fuel bays are perfect, of course.

All I had to do was detach one of my existing bays and give it to him for analysis.

Well, I gave it to his hull robot.

However he uses that robot to measure stuff, it does a good job.

Every valve connection is in the right place and the right size.

Every screw threading is perfectly spaced.

All told, he made three perfect copies of the fuel bay I gave him.

The only difference is the material.

My original bays were made of aluminum.

Someone on Stratt's team had suggested a carbon-fiber hull but she shot that down.

Well-tested technology only.

Humanity had sixty-odd years of testing aluminum-hulled spacecraft.

The new bays are made of...an alloy.

What alloy?

Dunno.

Rocky doesn't even know.

It's a mishmash of metals from non- critical systems aboard the Blip-A.

Mostly iron, he says.

But there's at least twenty different elements all melted together.

It's basically "metal stew."

But that's okay.

The fuel bays don't need to hold pressure.

They only have to keep the Astrophage aboard the ship- nothing else.

They do need to be strong enough to not break apart from the weight of the fuel inside when the ship accelerates.

But that's not hard.

They could literally be made out of wood and be just as effective.

"You are slow,"

he says.

"You are mean."

I ratchet the large cylinder into place with straps.

"Apologies.

I am excited.

Breeder Tanks Nine and Ten!"

"Yeah!"

I say.

"Fingers crossed!"

We're up to Taumoeba-78 as of the most recent generation.

That strain is breeding away in the tanks while I work on these fuel bays.

The spacing is 0.25 percent, which means for the first time ever, some breeder tanks actually have 8 percent or more nitrogen inside.

As for installing the tanks...sheesh.

I've learned that the first bolt is the hardest.

The fuel bay has a lot of inertia and it's hard to keep aligned with the hole.

Also, the original mounting system for the bay is gone.

The pyros saw to that.

They never figured I'd be adding in new bays after jettisoning old ones.

The pyros don't just open a clamp.

They shear the bolts clean off.

And they don't care about the damage to the mounting points.

I spend a lot of time un-suiciding this suicide mission.

While the threaded mounting holes are in reasonable shape, every one of them has a sheared-off bolt to deal with.

With no bolt head, they're a real pain in the patoot to unscrew.

I've found that the best approach is to bring sacrificial steel rods and the AstroTorch.

Melt the bolt a little, melt the rod a little, and weld them together.

The result is ugly but it gives me a lever arm with enough torque to remove the bolt.

Usually.

When I can't remove the bolt, I just start melting stuff.

Can't be stuck if it's liquid.

Three hours later, I finally have all the new fuel bays installed...sort of.

I cycle the airlock, climb out of the Orlan, and enter the control room.

Rocky is in his bulb waiting for me.

"It went well, question?"

I wiggle my hand back and forth-a gesture interestingly common to both humans and Eridians and with the same meaning.

"Maybe.

I'm not sure.

A bunch of the bolt holes were unusable.

So the bays aren't connected as well as they should be."

"Danger, question?

Your ship accelerate at 15 meters per second per second.

Will tanks hold, question?"

"I'm not sure.

Earth engineers often double requirements for safety.

I hope they did this time.

But I will test to be sure."

"Good good.

Enough talk.

Check breeder tanks, please."

"Yeah, yeah.

Let me get some water first."

He bounces and skitters down his tube to the lab.

"Why humans need water so much, question?

Inefficient life-forms!"

I chug a full liter bag of water I'd left in the control room before the EVA.

It's thirsty work.

I wipe my mouth and let the bag float off.

I push off the wall to float down the tunnel to the lab.

"Eridians need water, too, you know."

"We keep inside.

Closed system.

Some inefficiencies inside, but we get all water we need from food.

Humans leak!

Gross."

I laugh as I float into the lab where Rocky is waiting.

"On Earth, we have a scary, deadly creature called a spider.

You look like one of those.

Just so you know."

"Good.

Proud.

I am scary space monster.

You are leaky space blob."

He points to the breeder tanks.

"Check tanks!"

I kick off the wall and float over to the breeders.

This is the moment of truth.

I should check them one at a time starting with Tank One, but to heck with that.

I go straight to Tank Nine.

I shine a penlight into the tank and get a good look at the glass slide that was earlier covered in Astrophage.

I check the tank readouts, then check the slide again.

I grin at Rocky.

"Tank Nine's slide is clear.

We have Taumoeba-80!"

He absolutely explodes with noise!

His arms flail, his hands clatter against the tunnel walls.

It's just random notes in no discernable order.

After a few seconds he calms down.

"Yes!

Good!

Good good good!"

"Ha-ha, wow.

Okay.

Easy there."

I check Tank Ten.

"Hey, Tank Ten is also clear.

We have Taumoeba-82.5!"

"Good good good!"

"Good good good, indeed!"

I say.

"Now you do much testing.

Venus air.

Threeworld air."

"Yes.

Absolutely-"

He shifts back and forth from one tunnel wall to the other.

"Exact same gases in each test.

Same pressure.

Same temperature.

Same death 'radiation' from space.

Same light from nearby star.

Same same same."

"Yes.

I'll do that.

I'll do all of that."

"Do now."

"I need rest!

I just did an eight-hour EVA!"

"Do now!"

"Ugh!

No!"

I float over to his tunnel and face him through the xenonite.

"First I'm going to breed up a bunch more Taumoeba- 82.5.

Just to make sure we have enough for testing.

And I'll make several stable colonies of it in sealed containers."

"Yes!

And some on my ship too!"

"Yes.

The more backups the better."

He bounces back and forth some more.

"Erid will live!

Earth will live!

Everyone live!"

He curls the claws of one hand into a ball and presses it against the xenonite.

"Fist me!"

I push my knuckles against the xenonite.

"It's 'fist-bump,' but yeah."

- There has to be liquor somewhere.

I can't imagine Ilyukhina going on a suicide mission without insisting on some booze.

I can't imagine her going across the street without some booze, honestly.

And after looking through every box in the storage compartment, I finally find it-the personal kits.

The box has three zipped duffels.

Each one is labeled with a crewman's name.

"Yo,"

"Ilyukhina,"

and "DuBois."

I guess they never replaced DuBois's personal kit, because I never got a chance to make mine.

Still a little mad about how that played out.

But maybe I'll get a chance to tell Stratt my feelings on the topic.

I pull the kits into the dormitory with me and Velcro them to the wall.

Deeply personal belongings of three people who are now dead.

Friends who are now dead.

I may have a somber moment later and spend some time looking at all these bags have to offer.

But for now, this is a time of celebration.

I want booze.

I open Ilyukhina's bag.

There are all sorts of random knickknacks inside.

A pendant with some Russian writing on it, a worn old teddy bear she probably had as a kid, a kilogram of heroin, some of her favorite books, and there we are!

Five 1- liter bags of clear liquid labeled .

It's Russian for "vodka."

How do I know that?

Because I spent months on an aircraft carrier with a bunch of crazy Russian scientists.

I saw that word a lot.

I zip up her bag and leave it Velcroed to the wall.

I fly through to the lab where Rocky waits in his tunnel.

"Found it!"

I say.

"Good good!"

His usual jumpsuit and tool-belt bandolier are nowhere to be seen.

He has an outfit on I've never seen before.

"Well, well, well!

What have we here?"

I say.

He juts out his carapace with pride.

It's covered with a smooth cloth underlayment that supports symmetrical rigid shapes here and there.

Almost like armor, but not as fully covering, and I don't think they're metal.

The top hole, where his vents are, is ringed with rough gems.

Definitely jewelry of some kind.

They're faceted, similar to how Earth jewelry might be cut, but the quality is horrible.

They're blotchy and discolored.

But they're really big and I bet they sound great to sonar.

The sleeves leading off the shirt stop about halfway down his arms and are similarly ornamented at the cuffs.

Each shoulder is connected to its neighbors by loose braided cords.

And for the first time I've ever seen, he has gloves on.

All five hands are covered in coarse, burlap-like material.

This outfit would severely limit Rocky's ability to move freely, but hey, fashion isn't about comfort or convenience.

"You look great!"

I say.

"Thank!

This is special clothing for celebration."

I hold up a liter of vodka.

"This is special liquid for celebration."

"Humans...eat to celebrate?"

"Yeah.

I know Eridians eat in private.

I know you think it's gross to see.

But this is how humans celebrate."

"Is okay.

Eat!

We celebrate!"

I float over to the two experiments mounted to the lab table.

Inside one is an analog of the atmosphere of Venus.

Inside the other is the atmosphere of Threeworld.

In both cases, I made them as precise as I could.

I used the best reference data I have, which is considerable thanks to my collection of every human reference book ever and Rocky's knowledge about his own system.

In both cases, Taumoeba have not only survived but thrived.

They breed as fast as ever, and even the smallest amount of Astrophage injected into either experiment gets eaten immediately.

I hold the bag of vodka up.

"To Taumoeba-82.5!

Savior of two worlds!"

"You will give that liquid to the Taumoeba, question?"

I unclip the fastener on the straw.

"No, it's just a thing humans say.

I am honoring Taumoeba-82.5."

I take a sip.

It's like fire in my mouth.

Ilyukhina apparently liked her vodka strong and rough.

"Yes.

Much honoring!"

he says.

"Human and Eridian work together, save everyone!"

"Ah!"

I say.

"That reminds me: I need a life-support system for Taumoeba-something that feeds them just enough Astrophage to keep the colony alive.

It has to be completely automatic, has to work on its own for several years, and it has to weigh less than a kilogram.

I need four of them."

"Why so small, question?"

"I'm going to put one on each beetle.

Just in case something happens to the Hail Mary on the way home."

"Good plan!

You are smart!

I can make these for you.

Also, today I finish fuel-transfer device.

Can give you Astrophage now.

Then we both go home!"

"Yeah."

My smile fades.

"This is happy!

Your face opening is in sad mode.

Why, question?"

"Going to be a long trip and I'll be all alone."

I haven't decided if I want to risk a coma on the way home.

I may have to for my own sanity.

Total solitude and nothing to eat but chalky, nasty coma slurry might just be too much.

For the first part of the trip, at least, I definitely plan to stay awake.

"You will miss me, question?

I will miss you.

You are friend."

"Yeah.

I'm going to miss you."

I take another swig of vodka.

"You're my friend.

Heck, you're my best friend.

And pretty soon we're going to say goodbye forever."

He tapped two gloved claws together.

They made a muffled sound instead of the usual click that comes along with the dismissive gesture.

"Not forever.

We save planets.

Then we have Astrophage technology.

Visit each other."

I give a wry grin.

"Can we do all that within fifty Earth years?"

"Probably not.

Why so fast, question?"

"I only have fifty years or so left to live.

Humans don't"-I hiccup-"don't live long, remember?"

"Oh."

He's quiet for a moment.

"So we enjoy remaining time together, then go save planets.

Then we are heroes!"

"Yeah!"

I straighten up.

I'm a little dizzy now.

I've never been much of a drinker, and I'm hitting this vodka harder than I should.

"We're the moss imporn't people in the gal'xy!

We're awesome!"

He grabs a nearby wrench and raises it in one of his hands.

"To us!"

I raise the vodka.

"To ush!"

- "Well.

This is it,"

I say from my side of the connector.

"Yes,"

says Rocky on his side.

His voice is low, despite his attempts to keep it high.

The Hail Mary is all fueled up: 2.2 million kilograms of Astrophage.

A full 200,000 kilograms more than she left Earth with.

Rocky's replacement tanks were, of course, more efficient and had more volume than my originals.

I rub the back of my neck.

"I assume our people will meet up again.

I know humans will want to learn all about Erid."

"Yes,"

he says.

"Thank you for laptop.

Centuries of human technology all for our scientists to learn about.

You have given greatest gift in history of my people."

"You tested it in that life-support system you built for it, right?"

"Yes.

That is stupid question."

He grips a handle on his side to keep in place.

Rocky had removed his direct connecting tunnel and resealed the Hail Mary's hull.

He put the airlock-to-airlock connector in place to finish packing up.

At my request, he left the xenonite walls and tunnels in the Hail Mary in place, but with a few meter-wide holes in them here and there so I can use the space.

The more xenonite Earth scientists have to study the better, I figure.

The ship still smells a little like ammonia.

I guess even xenonite isn't completely immune to gas permeation.

It'll probably smell that way for a while.

"And your farms?"

I say.

"You double-checked them all?"

"Yes.

Six redundant Taumoeba-82.5 colonies, each in separate tanks with separate life-support systems.

Each with Threeworld simulated atmosphere.

Your farms are functioning, question?"

"Yeah,"

I say.

"Well, it's just my ten breeder tanks.

But now I have them all set up with Venus's atmosphere.

Oh, and thanks for the mini-farms, by the way.

I'll install them in the beetles during my trip.

I won't have much else to do."

He glances at a notepad.

"These numbers you gave me.

You are certain these are the times for me to turn around and the times for me to reach Erid, question?

They are so soon.

So fast."

"Yeah, that's time dilation for you.

Weird stuff.

But those are the correct values.

I checked them four times.

You'll reach Erid in under three Earth years."

"But Earth is almost same distance from Tau Ceti, and you will take four years, question?"

"I'll experience four years, yes.

Three years and nine months.

Because time won't be as compressed for me as it is for you."

"You have explained before, but again...why, question?"

"Your ship accelerates faster than mine.

You'll be moving closer to the speed of light."

He wiggles his carapace.

"So complicated."

I point toward his ship.

"All the information about relativity is in the laptop.

Have your scientists take a look."

"Yes.

They will be very pleased."

"Not when they find out about quantum physics.

Then they'll be really annoyed."

"Not understand."

I laugh.

"Don't worry about it."

We're both quiet for a while.

"I guess this is it,"

I say.

"It is time,"

he says.

"We go save homeworlds now."

"Yeah."

"You face is leaking."

I wipe my eyes.

"Human thing.

Don't worry about it."

"Understand."

He pushes himself along to his airlock door.

He opens it and pauses there.

"Goodbye, friend Grace."

I wave meekly.

"Goodbye, friend Rocky."

He disappears into his ship and closes the airlock door behind him.

I return to the Hail Mary.

After a few minutes, the Blip-A's hull robot detaches the tunnel.

We fly our ships nearly parallel but with a few degrees' difference in course.

This ensures neither of us vaporizes the other with the back blast from our Astrophage engines.

Once we have a few thousand kilometers of separation, we can aim in any direction we want.

Hours later, I sit in the cockpit with my spin drives offline.

I just want one last look.

I watch the point of IR light with the Petrovascope.

That's Rocky, headed back to Erid.

"Godspeed, buddy,"

I say.

I set course for Earth and fire up the spin drives.

I'm going home.

I sat in my cell, staring at the wall.

It wasn't a dingy jail cell or anything.

If anything, it looked kind of like a college dorm room.

Painted brick walls, desk, chair, bed, en-suite bathroom, et cetera.

But the door was steel and the windows were barred.

I wasn't going anywhere.

Why did the Baikonur launch facility have a jail cell handy?

I don't know.

Ask the Russians.

That launch would be today.

Soon, some muscular guards would come through that door along with a doctor.

He'd inject me with something and that'd be the last time I'd see Earth.

Almost on cue, I heard the clink of the door being unlocked.

A braver person might have seen that as an opportunity.

Charge the door and maybe get past the guards.

But I'd given up hope of escape long ago.

What would I do?

Run into the Kazakhstani desert and take my chances?

The door opened and Stratt walked in.

The guards closed the door behind her.

"Hey,"

she said.

I glared at her from my bunk.

"The launch is on schedule,"

she said.

"You'll be on your way soon."

"Whoopee."

She sat in the chair.

"I know you won't believe this, but it wasn't easy for me to do this to you."

"Yeah, you're really sentimental."

She ignored the barb.

"Do you know what I studied in college?

What my undergraduate degree was in?"

I shrugged.

"History.

I was a history major."

She drummed her fingers on the desk.

"Most people assume I had a science major or business management.

Communications, maybe.

But no.

It was history."

"Doesn't seem like you."

I sat up on my bunk.

"You don't spend a lot of time looking backward."

"I was eighteen years old and had no idea what to do with my life.

I majored in history because I didn't know what else to do."

She smirked.

"Hard to imagine me like that, eh?"

"Yeah."

She looked out the barred window toward the launchpad in the distance.

"But I learned a lot.

I actually liked it.

People nowadays...they have no idea how good they have it.

The past was unrelenting misery for most people.

And the further back in time you go, the worse it was."

She stood and meandered around the room.

"For fifty thousand years, right up to the industrial revolution, human civilization was about one thing and one thing only: food.

Every culture that existed put most of their time, energy, manpower, and resources into food.

Hunting it, gathering it, farming it, ranching it, storing it, distributing it...it was all about food.

"Even the Roman Empire.

Everyone knows about the emperors, the armies, and the conquests.

But what the Romans really invented was a very efficient system of acquiring farmland and transportation of food and water."

She walked to the other side of the room.

"The industrial revolution mechanized agriculture.

Since then, we've been able to focus our energies on other things.

But that's only been the last two hundred years.

Before that, most people spent most of their lives directly dealing with food production."

"Thanks for the history lesson,"

I said.

"But if it's all the same to you, I'd like my last few moments on Earth to be a little more pleasant.

So...you know...could you leave?"

She ignored me.

"Leclerc's Antarctica nukes bought us some time.

But not much.

And there's only so many times we can dump chunks of Antarctica into the ocean before the direct problems of sea-level rise and ocean-biome death cause more problems than Astrophage.

Remember what Leclerc told us: Half the global population will die."

"I know,"

I muttered.

"No, you don't know,"

she said.

"Because it gets a lot worse."

"Worse than half of humanity dying?"

"Of course,"

she said.

"Leclerc's estimate assumes all the nations of the world work together to share resources and ration food.

But do you think that will happen?

Do you think the United States-the most powerful military force of all time-is going to sit idly by while half their population starves?

How about China, a nation of 1.3 billion people that's always on the verge of famines in the best of times?

Do you think they'll just leave their militarily weak neighbors alone?"

I shook my head.

"There'll be wars."

"Yes.

There'll be wars.

Fought for the same reason most wars in ancient times were fought for: food.

They'd use religion or glory or whatever as an excuse, but it was always about food.

Farmlands and people to work that land.

"But the fun doesn't stop there,"

she said.

"Because once the desperate, starving countries start invading each other for food, the food production will go down.

Ever heard of the Tai Ping rebellion?

It was a civil war in China during the nineteenth century.

Four hundred thousand soldiers died in combat.

And twenty million people died from the resulting famine.

The war disrupted agriculture, see?

That's how massive in scale these things are."

She wrapped her arms around herself.

I'd never seen her look so vulnerable.

"Malnourishment.

Disruption.

Famine.

Every aspect of infrastructure going to food production and warfare.

The entire fabric of society will fall apart.

There'll be plagues too.

Lots of them.

All over the world.

Because the medical-care systems will be overwhelmed.

Once easily contained outbreaks will go unchecked."

She turned to face me.

"War, famine, pestilence, and death.

Astrophage is literally the apocalypse.

The Hail Mary is all we have now.

I'll make any sacrifice to give it even the tiniest additional chance of success."

I lay down on my bunk and faced away from her.

"Whatever lets you sleep at night."

She walked back to the door and knocked on it.

A guard opened it up.

"Anyway.

I just wanted you to know why I'm doing this.

I owed you that."

"Go to hell."

"Oh, I will, believe me.

You three are going to Tau Ceti.

The rest of us are going to hell.

More accurately, hell is coming to us."

- Yeah?

Well, hell's coming back to you, Stratt.

In the form of me.

I'm hell.

I mean...I don't know what I'll say to her.

But I definitely plan to say stuff.

Mean stuff.

I'm eighteen days into my nearly four-year journey.

I'm just now reaching Tau Ceti's heliopause-the edge of the star's powerful magnetic field.

At least, the edge of where it's strong enough to deflect fast-moving interstellar radiation.

From now on, the radiation load on the hull will be much higher.

Doesn't matter to me.

I'm surrounded by Astrophage.

But it's interesting to see the external radiation sensors go up and up and up.

It's progress, at least.

But in the grand scheme of things, I'm on a long road trip and my current status is "just walking out the front door of the house."

I'm bored.

I'm by myself in a spaceship without much to do.

I clean and catalog the lab again.

I might come up with some research experiments for either Astrophage or Taumoeba.

Heck, I could write some papers while I'm on my way home.

Oh, and there's the matter of the intelligent alien life-form I hung out with for a couple of months.

I might want to jot a few things down about him too.

I do have a huge collection of video games.

I have every piece of software that was available when we built the ship.

I'm sure they can keep me busy for a while.

I check the Taumoeba farms.

All ten of them are doing just fine.

I feed them Astrophage from time to time, just to keep them healthy and breeding.

The farms emulate Venus's atmosphere, so as the generations of Taumoeba go by, they'll get even better at Venusian life.

After four years of this, by the time I drop them off at the planet, they'll be well suited for it.

And yes, I've already decided I'll drop them off.

Why not?

I have no idea what kind of world I'll be returning to.

Thirteen years have passed on Earth since I left, and they'll experience another thirteen before I get back.

Twenty-six years.

All my students will be adults.

I hope they all survive.

But I have to admit...some probably won't.

I try not to dwell.

Anyway, once I get back to my solar system, I may as well swing by Venus and drop off the Taumoeba.

Not sure how I'll seed it, but I have a few ideas.

The simplest is just to wad up a ball of Taumoeba-infested Astrophage and throw it at Venus.

The Astrophage will absorb the heat of reentry and the Taumoeba will be released into the wild.

Then they'll have a field day.

Venus must be Astrophage-central by now, and lord knows Taumoeba can get right to work once they find their prey.

I check my food stores.

I'm still on schedule.

I have another three months of real, edible food packs left, and then it'll be coma slurry from then on.

I'm reluctant to go back into a coma.

I've got the genes to survive it, but so did Yo and Ilyukhina.

Why risk death if I don't have to?

Also, I can't be 100 percent sure I correctly reprogrammed the course navigation.

I think it's right, and whenever I spot- check, I'm still on course toward home.

But what if something goes wrong while I'm in a coma?

What if I wake up and I missed the solar system by a light-year?

But between isolation, loneliness, and disgusting food, I may be willing to take those risks eventually.

We'll see.

Speaking of loneliness, my thoughts turn back to Rocky.

My only friend now.

Seriously.

He's my only friend.

I didn't have much of a social life back when things were normal.

Sometimes I'd grab dinner with other faculty and staff at the school.

I'd have the occasional Saturday-night beer with old college friends.

But thanks to time dilation, when I get home all those folks will be a generation older than me.

I liked Dimitri.

He was probably my favorite of the whole Hail Mary gang.

But who knows what he's up to now?

Heck, Russia and the United States may be at war.

Or they may be allies in a war.

I have no idea.

I climb the ladder to the control room.

I sit in the pilot's seat and bring up the Nav panel.

I really shouldn't do this, but it's become a bit of a ritual.

I shut off the spin drives and coast.

Gravity immediately disappears, but I hardly notice.

I'm used to it.

With the spin drives off, I can safely use the Petrovascope.

I scan around in space for a bit-I know where to look.

I quickly find it.

The little dot of Petrova-frequency light.

The Blip-A's engines.

If I were within a hundred kilometers of that light, my entire ship would be vaporized.

I'm on one side of the system and he's on the other.

Heck, even Tau Ceti itself just looks like a lightbulb in the distance.

But I can still clearly make out the Blip-A's engine flare.

Using light as a propellant releases a simply absurd amount of power.

Maybe that's something we could use in the future.

Maybe Earth and Erid could communicate with massive releases of Petrova light thanks to Astrophage.

I wonder how much it would take to make a flash visible from 40 Eridani.

We could talk in Morse code or something.

They have a copy of Wikipedia now.

They'd work out what we're up to when they saw the flashes.

Still, our "conversation"

would be slow.

40 Eridani is sixteen light-years away from Earth.

So if we sent a message like "Hey, how ya doin'?"

it would be thirty-two years before we got their reply.

I stare at the little point of light on the screen and sigh.

I'll be able to track him for quite a while.

I know where his ship will be at any given moment.

He'll use the exact flight plan I gave him.

He trusts my science as much as I trust his engineering.

But after a few months, the Petrovascope won't be able to see the light anymore.

Not because the light is too dim-it's a very sensitive instrument.

It won't be able to see him because our relative velocities will cause a red-shift in the light coming off his drives.

It won't be the Petrova wavelength anymore when it gets to me.

What?

Would I do a ridiculous amount of relativistic math to calculate our relative velocity at any given moment as perceived by my inertial reference frame and then do Lorentz transformations to figure out when the light from his engines will drop out of the Petrovascope's perception range?

Just so I know how much longer I can see my friend in the distance?

Wouldn't that be kind of pathetic?

Yeah.

Okay, my sad little daily ritual is over.

I turn off the Petrovascope and fire up the spin drives again.

- I check my dwindling supply of real food.

I've been "on the road"

for thirty-two days now.

According to my calculations, fifty-one days from now I'll be completely reliant on coma slurry.

I go to the dormitory.

"Computer.

Provide coma food substance sample."

The mechanical arms reach into their supply area and come back with a bag of white powder and drop it on the bunk.

I pick up the bag.

Of course it's a powder.

Why would they include the liquid in the long-term storage?

The water system of the Hail Mary is a closed loop.

Water goes into me, it comes out of me in various ways, and then it's purified and reused.

I take the package to the lab, open it up, and pour some powder in a beaker.

I add a little water, give it a stir, and it becomes a milky-white slurry.

I give it a sniff.

It doesn't really smell like anything.

So I take a sip.

It takes effort, but I resist the urge to spit it out.

It tastes like aspirin.

That nasty pill-like taste.

I'm going to have to eat this Bitter Pill ChowTM every meal for several years.

Maybe a coma isn't that bad.

I set the beaker aside.

I'll deal with that misery when the time comes.

For now, I'm going to work on the beetles.

I have four little Taumoeba farms, courtesy of Rocky.

Each one is a steel-ish capsule no larger than my hand.

I say "steel- ish"

because it's some Eridian alloy of steel that humans haven't invented yet.

It's much harder than any metal alloys we have, but not harder than diamond-cutting tools.

We went back and forth on the mini-farm casing.

The obvious first choice was to make it out of xenonite.

The problem is: How would Earth scientists get in?

None of our tools would be able to cut it.

The only option would be extremely high heat.

And that risks harming the Taumoeba inside.

I suggested a xenonite container with a lid.

Something that could be clamped down tight like a pressure door.

I'd leave instructions on the USB stick on how to safely open it.

Rocky rejected that idea right away.

No matter how good the seal was, it wouldn't be perfect.

Over the two years that the farm will experience during the trip, enough air could leak out to suffocate the Taumoeba inside.

He insisted the whole farm be a single, completely sealed container.

Probably a good idea.

So we settled on Eridian steel.

It's strong, it doesn't oxidize easily, and it's extremely durable.

Earth can cut it open with a diamond saw.

And hey, they'll probably analyze it to learn how to make their own.

Everyone wins!

His approach for the farms themselves was simple.

Inside, there's an active colony of Taumoeba and a Venus-like atmosphere.

Also, there's a coil of very thin steel-ish tubing full of Astrophage.

The Taumoeba can only get at the outermost layer, so they have to work their way down the tube, which has a total length of about 20 meters.

Some basic experimentation tells us that will last the small Taumoeba population several years.

As for waste products-they'll just stew in their own poop.

The capsule will gain methane and lose carbon dioxide over time, but it doesn't matter.

Though it's a small volume by human standards, it's a vast, gigantic cavern to the tiny microbes inside.

The beetles have been a priority for me.

I want them ready for launch at a moment's notice.

Just in case there's a catastrophic problem with the Hail Mary.

But I don't want to send them off if there isn't a mission-critical problem.

The closer we are to Earth when they launch, the better their odds of making it there safely.

In addition to installing the mini-farms, I also have to refuel the little buggers.

I'd used almost half their fuel supply when they served as ad-hoc engines for the Hail Mary.

But they only need 60 kilograms of Astrophage each to be full.

Barely a drop in the bucket compared to my supply of imported, Eridian- made Astrophage.

everything else around here, it wasn't intended for reuse.

It's like adding fresh butane to a Bic lighter.

It's just not meant for that.

It's completely sealed.

I have to clamp it into the mill and use a 6-millimeter bit to get in...it's a whole big thing.

But I'm getting good at it.

I finished John and Paul yesterday.

Today I'm working on Ringo and, time permitting, George.

George will be the easiest.

I don't need to refuel him-I never used him as an engine.

I just have to attach the mini-farm.

Figuring out where to put the mini-farm was another matter.

Even with its small size, it's too big to fit inside the little probe.

So I epoxy it to the undercarriage.

Then I spot-weld a small counterweight to the top of the beetle.

The computer inside has very strong opinions about where the center of mass of the probe is.

It's easier to add a counterweight than completely reprogram a guidance system.

Which brings us to the matter of weight.

The additional weight of the farm makes the beetles weigh a kilogram more than they should.

That's okay.

I remember countless meetings with Steve Hatch discussing the design.

He's a weird little guy, but he's a heck of a rocket scientist.

The beetles know their location in space by looking at the stars, and if they have less fuel than they expected to have, they taper their acceleration down as needed.

In short: They'll get home.

It'll just take a little longer.

I ran the numbers and it's a trivial difference in Earth time.

Though the beetles will experience several additional months during the trip than the original plan.

I go to the supply cabinet and pull out the BOCOA (big ol' container of Astrophage).

It's a lightproof metal bin with wheels.

There are several hundred kilograms of Astrophage in there and I'm in 1.5 g's of gravity.

That's why I added the wheels.

You'd be amazed what you can do with a machine shop and a firm desire not to drag heavy stuff around.

I hold the handle with a towel because it's so hot.

I wheel it over to the lab table, settle into the chair, and get ready for the methodical refueling process.

I get the plastic syringe at the ready.

With it, I can squirt 100 milliliters of Astrophage into that 6-millimeter hole per shot.

That's about 600 grams.

All told, I have to do it about two hundred times per beetle.

I open the BOCOA and- "Ugh!"

I wince and draw away from the container.

It smells horrible.

"Uh..."

I say.

"Why does it smell like that?"

Then it hits me.

I know that smell.

It's the smell of dead, rotting Astrophage.

The Taumoeba are loose again.

I leap from the stool, but I don't have a plan.

"Okay, don't panic,"

I tell myself.

"Think clearly.

Then act."

The BOCOA is still hot.

That means there's a lot of living Astrophage still in there.

I caught it early.

That's good.

Not because of the BOCOA-it's toast.

I'll never be able to sort out the Taumoeba from the Astrophage in there.

But it means that however the heck the Taumoeba got in there, this is very recent and hopefully hasn't reached the ship's fuel.

Yes.

That's priority number one.

Don't let Taumoeba into the fuel bays.

Last time they got in was because of various microscopic leaks in the system.

But it had to have gotten there from the crew compartments where I had brought it aboard.

There isn't much overlap between the fuel system and the crew compartment.

There's just one place that's the likely culprit for transfer.

Life support.

If the ship is too cold, it runs air across coils filled with Astrophage to warm it up.

A breach in one of those coils would do it.

Lucky for me I've had a big pile of 96C Astrophage in the lab keeping the crew compartment so warm the ship has to use the air-conditioning system.

Okay, now I have a plan.

I scamper up the ladder to the control room.

I bring up the Life Support panel and look at the logs.

As I suspected, the heater hasn't been turned on in over a month.

I deactivate the heater entirely.

It shows as disabled, but I don't trust it.

I go to the primary breaker box.

It's under the pilot's seat.

I find the breaker for the heating system and flick it off.

"Okay,"

I say.

I get back in the seat and check the Fuel panel.

The fuel bays all seem to be in good shape.

The temperature is correct.

It wouldn't take long for Taumoeba to run wild and eat everything in a fuel bay-I know that for darn certain.

If they were affected, they'd be colder than that.

I bring up the spin-drive controls and shut the engines off.

The floor drops out from under me as I return to weightlessness.

I probably don't need to shut them off, but for now I don't want the fuel doing anything.

If there's Taumoeba in a fuel line, I want it to stay there, not get pumped all over the ship.

"Okay..."

I say again.

"Okay..."

More thinking.

How did it get loose?

I sterilized every part of this ship with nitrogen before getting a gram of Astrophage from Rocky.

The only Taumoeba aboard are in the sealed mini-farms on the beetles and the sealed, xenonite breeder tanks.

No.

No time for science questions.

I can speculate on the cause later.

Right now I have an engineering problem.

I wish Rocky were here.

I always wish Rocky were here.

"Nitrogen,"

I say.

I don't know how the Taumoeba got out, but I need them dead.

Taumoeba-82.5 can handle 8.25 percent nitrogen at 0.02 atmospheres.

Maybe a little higher.

But it definitely can't handle 100 percent nitrogen at the crew compartment's 0.33 atmospheres.

That works out to be two hundred times its lethal dose of nitrogen.

I float to the breaker box and shut off everything related to life support.

Immediately, the emergency alarm sounds and red lights turn on.

I kick across the control room to the emergency system's breaker box and shut those all off as well.

The master alarm is annoying, so I silence it on the main interface panel.

I fly down to the lab and throw open my gas cylinder supply cupboard.

I have about 10 kilograms of nitrogen gas in a single canister.

Again, I owe my life to DuBois's preferred method of suicide.

I don't remember all the details about the life-support system, but I know it has manual overpressure valves.

The ship simply will not allow more than 0.33 atmospheres.

If all else fails (which it will, because I shut the emergency systems down), it'll vent excess pressure into space.

I can't just release the nitrogen and hope for the best.

I want to get rid of the existing oxygen first.

I'm through messing around with this stuff.

I want 100 percent nitrogen in here.

I want to make this ship so utterly toxic to Taumoeba that it has no chance of survival.

Even if it's hiding under some goop somewhere-I want the nitrogen to suffuse through it.

Nitrogen everywhere.

Everywhere!

I grab the nitrogen cylinder, kick off the floor, and float back up to the control room.

I throw open the airlock inner door and get into the Orlan suit faster than I ever have in the past.

I boot everything up and don't even bother with the self-check.

No time.

I leave the inner airlock door open and turn the manual emergency valve on the outer door.

The ship's air hisses away into space.

The primary and emergency life-support systems are powered down.

They are unable to replace the lost gas.

Now I wait.

- It takes a surprisingly long time for a ship to lose all its air.

In movies, if there's a little breach everyone dies immediately.

Or the muscular hero guy plugs the hole with his biceps or something.

But in real life, air just doesn't move that fast.

The emergency valve on the airlock is 4 centimeters across.

Seems like a pretty big hole to have in your spaceship, right?

It took twenty minutes for the ship's air pressure to drop to 10 percent of its original value.

And it's dropping very slowly now.

I think it's a logarithmic function.

So in the middle of this emergency, I just have to stand here with my tank in my hand.

"Okay.

Ten percent is close enough,"

I say.

I close the airlock emergency valve to reseal the ship.

Then I open the nitrogen tank.

So now, instead of listening to a hiss from the airlock, I listen to a hiss from the nitrogen tank.

Not much difference there.

Again.

It's a bit of a wait.

But not as long this time.

Probably because the pressure inside that nitrogen tank was a lot higher than the pressure in the ship.

Whatever.

Point is, in short order the ship is back to 0.33 atmospheres of pressure.

But it's almost entirely nitrogen.

Funny thing-I'd be perfectly comfortable if I took this EVA suit off.

I'd breathe without any problems.

Right up until I died.

There's nowhere near enough oxygen for me to survive.

I want that nitrogen to permeate everything it can.

I want it to get into every crevice.

Wherever Taumoeba are lurking, I want them found and killed.

Go forth, my N2 minions, and cause destruction!

I head down to the lab and check out the BOCOA.

I left in such a hurry I forgot to seal the vat.

Fortunately, Astrophage is gunky stuff.

Surface tension and inertia kept it inside.

I close the lid and bring it up to the airlock.

I jettison the whole thing.

I probably could have saved the surviving Astrophage in the vat.

I could have bubbled nitrogen through the sludge to make sure it gets at all the little Taumoeba lurking inside.

But why take the chance?

I have over 2 million kilograms of Astrophage.

There's no point in risking the whole mission just to save a few hundred.

I wait three hours.

Then I flick the breakers back on.

After a period of initial panic, the life-support system gets the air back to normal thanks to the ship's copious oxygen reserves.

I have to isolate every source of Taumoeba on this ship.

Preferably before the life-support system finishes pumping out the nitrogen.

Why not do it before getting back to normal air?

Because it'll be a lot easier and faster without wearing the EVA suit.

I need my hands to do this, not my hands inside bulky gloves.

I climb out of the Orlan and fly down to the lab, the nitrogen cylinder in hand.

First up: the breeder farms.

I put each of the ten farms in large plastic bins.

I install a little valve on each bin (epoxy can do anything), and pump in nitrogen.

If any of the farms have a leak, the nitrogen will get in and kill everything.

Any farm that's behaving properly- keeping airtight-won't have any problems.

The bins are airtight to begin with, but I seal them with duct tape anyway, and I deliberately overpressurize them by just a little bit.

The sides and tops bulge out.

Now if any of the farms leak, it'll be visually apparent because the bulging will disappear.

Next up: the beetles and their mini-farms.

John and Paul already have their mini-farms installed.

I put them in isolation bins just like I did with the breeder farms.

I was working on Ringo when the poop hit the fan, so that mini- farm and the one intended for George are still uninstalled.

I put the pair together in another isolation bin.

I tape everything to the walls.

I don't want any of the bins to float around.

They might bump into something sharp.

The lab is a shambles.

I was halfway through disassembling Ringo when I shut off the spin drives.

Tools, beetle parts, and all manner of other junk floats around the room.

I'll have to clean all that up without the aid of gravity before I can even take a break.

"Well, this sucks,"

I mumble.

I t's been three days since the Great Taumoeba Escape.

I've taken no chances.

I manually shut off all the fuel bays-completely segregating each one from the fuel system.

Then, one tank at a time, I opened it, collected an Astrophage sample from the line, and checked it in the microscope for Taumoeba contamination.

Thankfully, all nine tanks passed the test.

I brought the spin drives back online and I'm cruising along at 1.5 g's again.

I cobble together a "Taumoeba alarm"

to alert me if this happens again.

I should have done that in the first place, but hindsight is 20/20.

It's a slide of Astrophage-same as I used in the Taumoeba farms-with a light on one side and a light sensor on the other.

The whole system is exposed to the open air of the lab.

If Taumoeba get ahold of that Astrophage, they'll eat it, the slide will turn clear, and the light sensor will start beeping.

So far, no beeping.

The slide remains jet-black.

Now that things have calmed down and the problem is contained, I can start asking the million-dollar question: How did the Taumoeba get loose?

I put my hands on my hips and stare at the quarantine zone.

"Which one of you did this?"

I say.

None of it makes sense.

The farms worked for months without any hint of a leak.

The mini-farms are hermetically sealed steel capsules.

Maybe some rogue Taumoeba was lurking on the ship since the last outbreak-back at Adrian.

Somehow it didn't find any Astrophage until just now?

No.

From our experiments, Rocky and I learned that Taumoeba can only last about a week without food before it starves to death.

And they're not big on moderation.

Either they wildly breed and consume all Astrophage to be found, or they aren't present at all.

One of these containers must be leaking.

I can't just jettison everything-I need these Taumoeba to save Earth-so what do I do?

I have to figure out which one is the problem.

I check each farm as best I can.

Since they're in bins, I can't operate any of the controls, but I don't need to.

They're fully automated.

It's a pretty simple system-Rocky tends to find elegant solutions to complex problems.

The farm monitors the air temperature inside.

If it drops below 96.415 degrees Celsius, it means there's no more Astrophage because the Taumoeba ate it.

So it pumps in a little more Astrophage.

Simple as that.

And the system keeps track of how often it has to feed them.

From that it makes a very rough approximation of the Taumoeba population inside.

It adjusts the Astrophage feed rate as needed to control that population and, of course, has a readout to tell us the current state.

I check each farm's readouts.

Each one shows 96.415 degrees Celsius with a population estimate of 10 million Taumoeba.

Exactly what they're supposed to read.

"Hm,"

I say.

The air pressure inside those farms is way lower than the nitrogen pressure surrounding them.

If any of those farms had a leak, the nitrogen would get in and pretty soon the Taumoeba would all die.

But they haven't.

And it's been three days.

The breeder farms aren't leaking.

It must be the mini-farms.

But how the heck does a microbe work its way through half a centimeter of Eridian steel?

Rocky knows what he's doing, and he knows all about Eridian steel.

If it wasn't good for holding microbes in place, he'd know.

They don't have Taumoeba on Erid, but they definitely have other microbes.

This isn't new to them.

All of this leads me to something I would normally consider impossible: Rocky made an engineering mistake.

He never makes mistakes.

Not when it comes to creating things.

He's one of the most talented engineers on his entire planet!

He couldn't have messed up.

Could he?

I need definitive proof.

I make more Astrophage test slides.

They're super-handy for Taumoeba detection and easy to make.

I start with the bin containing the two mini-farms-the ones intended for George and Ringo.

They certainly seem sealed.

They're just capsule-shaped pieces of metal.

All sorts of stuff going on inside, but smooth Eridian steel on the outside.

I peel the duct tape off one corner of the box, pry up the lid, and throw an Astrophage slide in, then reseal everything.

Experiment number one: Make sure I didn't accidentally breed up some Super-Taumoeba that can live in pure nitrogen.

Another fun fact I've learned: Once Taumoeba get ahold of an Astrophage slide, it'll be crystal clear in a couple of hours.

So I wait a couple of hours and the slide is still black.

Okay, good.

No Super-Taumoeba.

I unseal the bin, open the lid, and let it air out for a minute.

Then I reseal it.

The nitrogen content in there will be nominal now.

Way less than Taumoeba-82.5 needs to worry about.

If there's a leak in those mini-farms, the slide will tell the tale.

One hour, no results.

Two hours, no results.

I take a sample of the air inside the bin just to be sure.

The nitrogen level is nearly zero.

So that's not an issue.

I seal it up again and give it another hour.

Nothing.

The mini-farms aren't leaking.

At least, the ones intended for George and Ringo aren't.

Maybe the leak was in one of the mini-farms I've already installed.

They're just glued to the outsides of John and Paul.

They're not protected by the beetle's hull or anything.

I repeat the Taumoeba detection experiment with John and Paul's bins.

I get the same result: no Taumoeba at all.

"Hm."

Okay, time for the ultimate test.

I remove John, Paul, and the two uninstalled mini-farms from quarantine.

I set them on the lab table next to my Taumoeba alarm.

I'm pretty sure they're clean.

But if they aren't, I want to know right away.

I turn my attention to the even less likely culprits: the breeder farms.

If Taumoeba can't escape Eridian steel, they definitely can't get through xenonite.

One centimeter of that stuff can effortlessly hold in Rocky's 29 atmospheres of pressure!

It's harder than diamond and also somehow not brittle.

But I need to be thorough.

I repeat the Astrophage slide test with all ten of the breeder farm bins.

There's no point in doing them one at a time.

I pipeline the whole process.

Now all ten of the farms are in sealed bins full of normal air and have an Astrophage slide inside.

It's been a long day.

It's a good time to take a break and sleep.

I'll leave them overnight to see what happens.

I bring bedding up from the dormitory to the lab.

If my Taumoeba-detector alarm goes off, I want to be darn sure it wakes me up.

I'm too pooped to work up a louder solution.

So I'll just bring my ears closer to the lab table and call it a night.

I drift off to sleep.

It feels wrong to sleep without someone watching.

- I wake up about six hours later.

"Coffee."

But the nanny-arms are downstairs in the dormitory.

So of course I get no response.

"Oh, right..."

I sit up and stretch.

I get up and shuffle over to the quarantine zone.

Let's see how those Taumoeba farm tests are doing.

I check the first farm's Astrophage slide.

It's completely clear.

So I move on to the next- Wait.

It's clear?

"Uh..."

I'm still not 100 percent awake.

I wipe my eyes and take another look.

It's still clear.

Taumoeba got to the slide.

It got out of the breeder farm!

I spin to the Taumoeba alarm on the lab table.

It's not beeping, but I run over to get a visual.

The Astrophage slide in it is still black.

I take a deep breath and let it out.

"Okay..."

I say.

I return to the quarantine zone and check the other farms.

Every single one of them has a clear slide.

The farms are leaking.

All of them are leaking.

The mini-farms are fine.

They're sitting on the lab table right next to the Taumoeba alarm.

I rub the back of my neck.

I've found the problem, but I don't understand it.

Taumoeba are getting out of the farms.

But how?

If there was a crack in the xenonite, the overpressure of nitrogen would've gotten inside and killed everything.

All ten farms have happy, healthy Taumoeba populations.

So what gives?

I climb down to the dormitory and have breakfast.

I stare at the xenonite wall that once housed Rocky's workshop.

The wall is still there, but with a hole cut in it where I'd requested.

I'm using the area mainly for storage.

I chew on a breakfast burrito, trying to ignore the fact that I'm one meal closer to coma slurry.

I stare at the hole.

I imagine I'm a Taumoeba.

I'm millions of times larger than a nitrogen atom.

But I can get through a hole the nitrogen atom can't.

How?

And where did the hole come from?

I'm starting to get a bad feeling.

A suspicion, really.

What if Taumoeba can, for lack of a better description, work their way around the molecules of xenonite?

What if there's no hole at all?

We tend to think of solid materials as magical barriers.

But at the molecular scale they're not.

They're strands of molecules or lattices of atoms or both.

When you get down to the teeny, tiny realm, solid objects are more like thick jungles than brick walls.

I can work my way through a jungle, no problem.

I may have to climb over bushes, weave around trees, and duck under branches, but I can make it.

Imagine a thousand tennis-ball launchers at the edge of that jungle aimed in random directions.

How deep into the jungle will the tennis balls get?

Most of them won't get past the first few trees.

Some may get lucky bounces and go a little deeper in.

Fewer still may get multiple lucky bounces.

But pretty soon, even the luckiest tennis ball runs out of energy.

You'd be hard-pressed to find any tennis balls 50 feet into that jungle.

Now, let's say it's a mile wide.

I can make it to the other side, but there's just no chance a tennis ball can.

That's the difference between Taumoeba and nitrogen.

The nitrogen is just moving in a line and bouncing off stuff like a tennis ball.

It's inert.

But Taumoeba is like me.

It has stimulus- response capabilities.

It senses its environment and takes directed action based on that sensory input.

We already know it can find Astrophage and move toward it.

It definitely has senses.

But nitrogen atoms are ruled by entropy.

They won't "exert effort"

to do anything.

I can walk uphill.

But a tennis ball can only roll so far before it rolls back down.

That all seems really weird.

How could Taumoeba, from the planet Adrian, know how to carefully navigate its way through xenonite, a technological invention from the planet Erid?

It does not make sense.

Life-forms don't evolve traits for no reason.

Taumoeba lives in the upper atmosphere.

Why would it develop the ability to work its way through dense molecular structures?

What evolutionary reason could there be to- I drop my burrito.

I know the answer.

I don't want to admit it to myself.

But I know the answer.

- I go back to the lab and perform a nerve-wracking experiment.

The experiment itself isn't nerve-wracking.

I'm just worried that the results will be what I expect.

I still have Rocky's AstroTorch.

It's the only thing on the ship that can get hot enough to dissociate xenonite.

There's plenty of xenonite to be had throughout the ship, thanks to Rocky's tunnel system.

I cut into the dormitory divider wall.

I can only cut a little bit at a time, then I have to wait for life support to cool things back down.

The AstroTorch makes a lot of heat.

In the end, I have four rough circles, each a couple of inches across.

Yes, inches.

When I'm stressed out, I revert to imperial units.

It's hard to be an American, okay?

I take them up to the lab and put together an experiment.

I smear some Astrophage on one of the circles and put another circle on top of it.

Astrophage sandwich.

Delicious, but only if you can get through the xenonite "bread."

I epoxy the two halves together.

I make another identical sandwich.

And then I make another two similar sandwiches, but instead of xenonite, I use ordinary plastic discs that I cut from some mill stock.

Okay.

Four hermetically sealed Astrophage samples-two with xenonite discs, two with plastic discs, all four of them sealed with epoxy.

I get two clear, sealable containers and set them up on the lab table.

I put a xenonite sandwich and a plastic sandwich in each container.

In the sample cabinet, I have a few metal vials full of natural Taumoeba.

The original stuff from Adrian, not the Taumoeba- 82.5 version.

I set the vial in one of the containers, open it up, and quickly seal the experiment.

This is a very dangerous road to go down, but at least I know how to contain a Taumoeba outbreak if it happens.

As long as I have nitrogen I'm okay.

I go to Breeder Tank One in the quarantine zone.

I use a syringe to get the Taumoeba-infected air from the bin, then immediately flood the bin with nitrogen.

I tape over the hole made by the syringe.

Back to the lab table, I close up the other container and use the syringe to inject the Taumoeba-82.5 in.

Again, I seal that hole with tape.

I rest my chin in my hands and peer into the two boxes.

"Okay, you sneaky little punks.

Let's see what you can do..."

It takes a couple of hours, but I finally see results.

They're exactly what I expected and the opposite of what I'd hoped.

I shake my head.

"Dang it."

The xenonite-covered Astrophage in the Taumoeba-82.5 experiment is gone.

The plastic-covered Astrophage remains unchanged.

Meanwhile in the other experiment, both Astrophage samples are unharmed.

What that means: The "control"

samples (the plastic discs) prove Taumoeba can't get through epoxy or plastic.

But the xenonite samples tell a different story.

Taumoeba-82.5 can work its way through xenonite, but natural Taumoeba can't.

"I'm so stupid!"

I smack myself on the head.

I thought I was oh so clever.

All that time in the breeder tanks.

Generation after generation of Taumoeba.

I used evolution to my advantage, right?

I made Taumoeba with nitrogen resistance!

I'm so awesome!

Let me know when I can pick up my Nobel Prize!

Ugh.

Yes, I made a strain of Taumoeba that could survive nitrogen.

But evolution doesn't care what I want.

And it doesn't do just one thing at a time.

I bred up a bunch of Taumoeba that evolved to survive...in xenonite breeder tanks.

Sure, it has nitrogen resistance.

But evolution has a sneaky way of working on a problem from every angle.

So not only did they gain resistance to nitrogen, they figured out how to hide from nitrogen by sneaking into the xenonite itself!

Why wouldn't they?

Xenonite is a complicated chain of proteins and chemicals I have no hope of understanding.

But I guess Taumoeba has a way to worm its way in.

There's a nitrogen apocalypse going on in the breeder farm.

If you can get into the xenonite walls deep enough that the nitrogen can't reach, you get to survive!

Taumoeba can't get through ordinary plastic.

It can't get through epoxy resin.

It can't get through glass.

It can't get through metal.

I'm not even sure if it could get through a ziplock bag.

But thanks to me, Taumoeba-82.5 can get through xenonite.

I took a life-form I knew nothing about and used technology I didn't understand to modify it.

Of course there were unintended consequences.

It was stupidly arrogant of me to assume I could predict everything.

I take a deep breath and let it out.

Okay, this isn't the end of the world.

In fact, it's the opposite.

This Taumoeba can permeate xenonite.

No problem.

I'll store it in something else.

It's still nitrogen-resistant.

It doesn't need xenonite to survive.

I tested it thoroughly in my glass lab equipment back when we first isolated the strain.

It'll still do its thing on Venus and Threeworld.

Everything's fine.

I glance back at the breeder farms.

Yeah.

Fine.

I'll make a big farm out of metal.

It's not hard.

I have a mill and all the raw materials I need.

And God knows I have time to spare.

I'll salvage the operational equipment from a farm Rocky made.

Only the casing is xenonite.

Everything else is metals and stuff.

I don't need to reinvent the wheel.

I just need to put it on a different car.

"Yeah,"

I reassure myself.

"Yeah, this is okay."

I just need to make a box that can maintain a Venusian atmosphere.

All of the hard stuff is already done, thanks to Rocky.

Rocky!

I feel a sudden surge of nausea.

I have to sit on the floor and put my head between my legs.

Rocky has the same strain of Taumoeba aboard his ship.

It's stored in xenonite farms like mine.

All critical bulkheads of his ship, including the fuel tanks, are made of xenonite.

There's nothing standing between his Taumoeba and his fuel.

"Oh...God..."

I made the new Taumoeba farm.

Sheet aluminum and some basic milling on the CNC mill.

It wasn't a problem.

Rocky's ship is the problem.

I've been watching his engine flare every day for the past month.

Now it's gone.

I float in the control room.

The spin drives are off, and the Petrovascope is set to maximum sensitivity.

There's some random Petrova-wavelength light coming from Tau Ceti itself, as always.

And even that's dim.

The star, almost as bright as Earth's sun, now just looks like a fatter-than-usual dot in the night sky.

But aside from that...nothing.

I'm way too far away to detect the Tau CetiAdrian Petrova line and the Blip-A is nowhere to be seen.

And I know right where it should be.

Down to the milli-arc- second.

And from here, its engines should be lighting up my scope....

I ran the numbers again and again.

Though I'd already proven my formulae correct by daily observations of his progress.

Now there's nothing.

No blip from the Blip-A.

He's derelict out there.

His Taumoeba escaped their enclosure and wormed their way into his fuel bays.

From there, they ate everything.

Millions of kilograms of Astrophage gone in a matter of days.

He's smart, so he surely has the fuel compartmentalized.

But those compartments are made of xenonite, right?

Yeah.

Three days.

If the ship were damaged, he'd fix it.

There's nothing Rocky can't fix.

And he works fast.

Five arms whipping around, often doing unrelated things.

He could be dealing with a massive Taumoeba infection, but how long would that take?

He has plenty of nitrogen.

He can harvest as much as he wants from his ammonia atmosphere.

Let's assume he did that as soon as he noticed the contagion.

How long would it take him to get things back online?

Not this long.

Whatever may have happened, if the Blip-A could be fixed, he would have fixed it by now.

The only explanation for it still being dead in space is that it has no fuel.

He wasn't able to stop the Taumoeba in time.

I put my head in my hands.

I can go home.

I really can.

I can return and spend the rest of my life a hero.

Statues, parades, et cetera.

And I'll be in a new world order where all energy problems are solved.

Cheap, easy, renewable energy everywhere thanks to Astrophage.

I can track down Stratt and tell her to shove it.

But then Rocky dies.

And more important, Rocky's people die.

Billions of them.

I'm this close.

I just need to survive four years.

Yeah, it'll be eating nasty coma slurry but I'll be alive.

My annoying logical mind points out the other option: Launch the beetles-all four of them.

Each with their own Taumoeba mini-farm and a USB stick full of data and findings.

Earth scientists will take it from there.

Then turn the Hail Mary around, find Rocky, and take him home to Erid.

One problem: It means I die.

I have enough food to survive the trip to Earth.

Or I have enough to survive the trip to Erid.

But even if the Eridians refuel the Hail Mary right away, there won't be enough food for me to survive the trip back to Earth from Erid.

I'll have only a few months of food left at that point.

I can't grow anything.

I don't have any viable seeds or living plant matter.

I can't eat Eridian food.

Too many heavy metals and other major toxins.

So that's what I'm left with.

Option 1: Go home a hero and save all of humanity.

Option 2: Go to Erid, save an alien species, and starve to death shortly after.

I pull on my hair.

I sob into my hands.

It's cathartic and exhausting.

All I see when I close my eyes is Rocky's dumb carapace and his little arms always fidgeting with something.

- It's been six weeks since I made my decision.

It wasn't easy, but I'm sticking with it.

I have the spin drives off for my daily ritual.

I bring up the Petrovascope and look out into space.

I see nothing at all.

"Sorry, Rocky,"

I say.

Then I spot a tiny speck of Petrova light.

I zoom in and search that area.

A total of four little dots, barely visible, are on the monitor.

"I know you'd love a beetle to take apart, but I couldn't spare one."

The beetles, with much smaller spin drives, won't be visible for much longer.

Especially with them zooming off toward Earth and me headed almost the opposite direction toward the Blip-A.

The Astrophage coils in the mini-farms will protect the Taumoeba from radiation, and I did thorough tests to make sure both the farms and the life inside could handle the massive acceleration that beetles use.

They'll be back at Earth in a couple of years from their point of view.

About thirteen years, from Earth's time frame.

I bring the spin drives back online and continue on course.

Finding a spaceship "somewhere just outside the Tau Ceti system"

is no small task.

Imagine being given a rowboat and told to find a toothpick "somewhere in the ocean."

It's like that, but nowhere near as easy.

I know his course and I know he followed it.

But I don't know when his engines conked out.

I only checked up on him once a day.

Right now, I'm smack-dab in the center of my "best guess"

for his position and I've matched my best guess on his velocity.

But that's only the beginning.

I have a heck of a search ahead of me.

I wish I had tracked him more often.

Because I don't know the exact time his engines died, the margin of error on my guess is about 20 million kilometers.

That's about one-eighth the distance between the Earth and the sun.

It's a distance so large it takes light a full minute to traverse it.

That's the best I can do with the information I have.

Frankly, I'm lucky the error margin is so small.

If the Taumoeba had escaped a month later, it would have been exponentially worse.

And all this is going on at the edge of the Tau Ceti system.

Barely the beginning of the trip.

The distance between Tau Ceti and Earth is over four thousand times the width of the entire Tau Ceti system.

Space is big.

It's...so, so big.

So yeah.

I'm extremely lucky to have only 20 million kilometers to search.

"Hmm,"

I mumble.

This far away from Tau Ceti, his ship won't be reflecting much Taulight.

There's no chance I'd spot the Blip-A with my telescope.

Side note: I'm going to die.

"Stop,"

I say.

Whenever I think about my impending death, I think about Rocky instead.

He must have a sense of hopelessness right now.

I'm coming, buddy.

"Wait..."

I'm sure he's sad, but he's also not one to mope for long.

He'll be working on a solution.

What would he do?

His whole species is on the line and he doesn't know I'm coming.

He wouldn't just kill himself, right?

He'd do anything he could think of, even if it would have only a tiny percent chance of success.

Okay.

I'm Rocky.

My ship is dead.

Maybe I rescued some Astrophage.

The Taumoeba can't have gotten all of it, right?

So I have some.

Can I make my own beetle?

Something to send back to Erid?

I shake my head.

That would require a guidance system.

Computer stuff.

Way beyond Eridian science.

That's why they had a crew of twenty-three on a massive ship in the first place.

Besides, it's been a month and a half.

If he were going to build a little ship, he'd be done by now and I would have seen its engine flare.

Rocky moves fast.

Okay.

No beetle.

But he's got energy.

Life support.

Food enough to last him a long, long time (original crew of twenty- three, and it was always intended to be a round-trip voyage).

"Radio?"

I say.

Maybe he'll make a radio signal.

Something powerful enough to be heard on Erid.

Just a small chance of detection, but something.

Eridians have a long life-span.

Waiting a decade or so for rescue wouldn't be that big a deal.

Well, not on the life- or-death scale.

If you asked me a few years ago I'd say it's not possible to send a radio signal ten light-years.

But this is Rocky we're talking about, and he might have some rescued Astrophage to power whatever he creates.

It doesn't have to contain information.

It just needs to be noticed.

But...no.

There's just no way.

Some back-of-the napkin math tells me that even with Earth's radio technology (which is better than Erid's), the strength of that signal at Erid would be way less than background noise.

Rocky will know that too.

So there's no point.

"Hmm."

I wish I had better radar.

Mine is good for a few thousand kilometers.

Obviously that's nowhere near good enough.

Rocky could probably whip something up if he were here.

It's a little paradoxical, but I wish Rocky were here to help me save Rocky.

"Better radar..."

I mumble.

Well, I have plenty of power.

I have a radar system.

Maybe I can work something out.

But you can't just add power to the emitter and expect things to go well.

I'll burn it out for sure.

How can I turn Astrophage energy into radio waves?

I shoot up from my pilot's seat.

"Duh!"

I have everything I need for the best radar ever!

To heck with my built-in radar system, with its measly emitter and sensors.

I have spin drives and a Petrovascope!

I can throw 900 terawatts of IR light out the back of my ship and see if any of it bounces back with the Petrovascope-an instrument carefully designed to detect even the smallest amounts of that exact frequency of light!

I can't have the Petrovascope and engines on at the same time.

But that's okay!

Rocky is up to a light-minute away!

I work up a search grid.

It's pretty simple.

I'm smack-dab in the middle of my guesstimate on Rocky's location.

So I have to search all directions.

Easy enough.

I fire up the spin drives.

I take manual control, which, as usual, requires me to say "yes,"

"yes,"

"yes,"

and "override"

to a bunch of warning dialogs.

I throw the throttle to full and turn hard to port with the yaw controls.

The force shoves me back into the seat and to the side.

This is the astronavigational equivalent of doing donuts in the 7- Eleven parking lot.

I keep it tight-it takes me thirty seconds to do one full rotation.

I'm roughly back where I started.

Probably a few dozen kilometers off but whatever.

I cut the engines.

Now I watch the Petrovascope.

It's not omnidirectional, but it can cover a good 90-degree arc of space at a time.

I slowly pan across space in the same direction I'd shined the engines and at the same rate.

It's not perfect; I could get the timing wrong.

If Rocky is very close or very far away this won't work.

But this is just my first try.

I finish a full circle with the Petrovascope.

Nothing.

So I do another lap.

Maybe Rocky is farther than I thought.

The second lap turns up nothing.

Well, I'm not done yet.

Space is three-dimensional.

I've only searched one flat slice of the area.

I pitch the ship forward 5 degrees.

I do the same search pattern again.

But this time, the plane of my search pattern is 5 degrees different from the last time.

If I don't get a hit on this pass, I'll do another 5-degree tilt and try again.

And so on until I get to 90 degrees, when I will have searched all directions.

And if that doesn't work, I'll start over, but with a faster pan rate on the Petrovascope.

I rub my hands together, take a sip of water, and get to work.

- A flash!

I finally see a flash!

Halfway through my Petrova pan of the 55-degree plane.

A flash!

I flail in surprise, which launches me out of the seat.

I bounce around the zero-g control room and scramble back into position.

It's been slow going up till now.

I was as bored as a guy could be.

But not anymore!

"Crud!

Where was it!

Okay!

Relax!

Calm down.

Calm down!"

I put my finger on the screen where I saw the blip.

I check the Petrovascope bearing, do some math on the screen, and work out the angle.

It's 214 degrees' yaw in my current plane, which is 55 degrees off the Tau CetiAdrian orbital ecliptic.

"Gotcha!"

Time for a better reading.

I strap on my now-worn and banged-up stopwatch.

Zero g has not been kind to the little guy, but it still works.

I take the controls and angle the ship directly away from the contact.

I start the stopwatch, thrust in a straight line for ten seconds, turn, and shut down the engines.

I'm moving something like 150 meters per second away from the contact, but that doesn't matter.

I don't want to zero out the velocity I just added.

I want the Petrovascope.

I stare at the screen with the stopwatch ticking away in my hand.

Soon, I see the blip again.

Twenty-eight seconds.

The spot of light remains for ten seconds, then disappears.

I can't guarantee it's the Blip-A.

But whatever it is, it's definitely a reflection of my spin drives.

And it's fourteen light- seconds away (fourteen seconds to get there, fourteen seconds to get back equals twenty-eight seconds).

That works out to about 4 million kilometers.

No point in trying to work out the object's velocity by taking multiple readings.

I don't have that kind of precision with my "finger on the screen"

approach.

But I have a heading.

I can cover 4 million kilometers in nine and a half hours.

I fist-pump.

"Yes!

I'm definitely going to die!"

I don't know why I said that.

I guess...well, if I wasn't able to find Rocky, I'd set course for Earth.

I'm surprised I put this much effort into it, actually.

Whatever.

I set course for where I saw the blip and fire up the engines.

I don't even need to account for relativity on this one.

Just high-school physics.

I'll accelerate half the way, then decelerate the other half.

- I spend the next nine hours cleaning up.

I'm going to have a guest again!

I hope.

Rocky will have to plug up all the holes he made in the xenonite walls.

But that shouldn't be a problem.

That assumes the contact I got was the Blip-A and not just a random piece of debris in space.

I try not to think about it.

Keep hope alive and all that.

I move all my junk out of the xenonite areas.

Once I'm done with that, I fidget a lot.

I want to stop and do another sweep to confirm my heading, but I resist the urge.

Just wait it out.

I stare at the aluminum Taumoeba farm in my lab.

And the slide of Astrophage next to it in the Taumoeba alarm.

Everything is going just fine.

Maybe I could- The timer beeps.

I'm at the location!

I scramble up the ladder to the control room and shut off the spin drives.

I have the Radar screen up before I even get in the chair.

I do a full active ping and full power.

"Come on...come on...."

Nothing.

I settle into the seat and strap in.

I thought something like this might happen.

I'm a lot closer to the contact now, but still not in radar range.

I just traveled 4 million kilometers.

Radar range is less than a thousandth of that.

So my precision isn't 99.9 percent.

Big surprise.

Time for another Petrovascope sweep.

But this time I don't have the luxury of a full light-minute between me and the contact, wherever it is.

If I'm, say, 100,000 kilometers away, I'll have less than a second before the light comes back to me.

And I can't use the Petrovascope with the spin drives on.

So now what?

I need to create a bunch of Astrophage light without turning off the Petrovascope.

I look through the menu options and don't find anything.

There's no way to have the scope on when the spin drives are running.

It must be a physical interlock somewhere.

Somewhere aboard this ship is a wire leading from the spin-drive controls to the Petrovascope.

I could spend the rest of my life looking for that and have no success.

However, the main engines aren't the only spin drives I have.

The attitude-adjustment engines are little spin drives sticking out the side of the Hail Mary.

They're what let me yaw, pitch, and roll the ship.

I wonder if the Petrovascope cares about them?

I keep the scope on and do a quick roll to the left.

The ship rolls and the scope stays active!

Got to love those edge cases!

Though I'm sure someone on the design team thought of this case.

They probably decided the comparatively small output from the attitude drives wouldn't hurt the scope.

And, looking at the overall concepts, it makes sense.

The engines and attitude drives all point away from the ship and thus away from the Petrovascope.

The reason it shuts down when the main drives are on is because of reflected light off small amounts of cosmic dust.

The reflected light from the far less powerful adjustment drives was deemed acceptable.

But those adjustment drives are still putting out enough light to vaporize steel.

Maybe they'll be enough to light up the Blip-A.

I aim the Petrovascope parallel to the port-side yaw thruster.

In fact, I can see the thruster itself in the bottom of the visible- light mode image.

I fire it up.

There's definitely a visible glow in the Petrova spectrum.

A general haze near the thruster, like turning on a flashlight in the fog.

But after a few seconds the haze dies down.

It's still there, just not as prevalent.

Probably dust and trace gases from the Hail Mary herself.

Tiny particles of stuff drifting away from the ship.

Once the thruster vaporized all the ones nearby, things calmed down.

I keep the thruster on, and let the ship rotate on its yaw axis as I watch the Petrovascope.

Now I have a flashlight.

The rotation rate of the ship increases faster and faster.

I can't have that.

So I activate the starboard-side yaw thruster as well.

The computer complains up a storm.

There's no sensible reason to tell the ship to rotate clockwise and counterclockwise at the same time.

I ignore the warnings.

I do a full revolution and see nothing.

Okay.

Nothing new.

I do a 5-degree pitch adjustment and try again.

On my sixth go-around-at 25 degrees from the Adrian ecliptic, I spot the contact.

Still too far away to make out any detail.

But it's a flash of light in response to my yaw thruster.

I flick the thruster on and off a few times to gauge the response time.

It's nearly instant-I'd say less than a quarter second.

I'm within 75,000 kilometers.

I point toward the contact and fire up the drives.

This time I won't go barreling in willy-nilly.

I'll stop every 20,000 kilometers or so and take another reading.

I smile.

It's working.

Now I just have to hope I haven't been chasing an asteroid all day.

- With careful flying and repeated measurements, I finally have the object on radar!

It's right there on the screen.

"-."

"Oh, right,"

I say.

I forgot that's how it got its name.

I'm 4,000 kilometers away-the very edge of radar range.

I bring up the telescope view, but I can't see anything, even at the highest magnification.

The telescope was made for finding celestial bodies hundreds or thousands of kilometers across, not a spaceship a few hundred meters long.

I creep closer.

The object's velocity with respect to Tau Ceti is about right for Rocky's ship.

Roughly the speed he would have gotten to around the time his engines died.

I could take a bunch of readings and do math to work out its course, but I have an easier plan.

I thrust for a few minutes here, a few minutes there, slowing down and speeding up until I match the object's velocity.

It's still 4,000 kilometers away, but now the relative velocity to me is almost zero.

Why do this?

Because the Hail Mary is very good at telling me about its own course.

I bring up the Nav console and tell it to calculate my current orbit.

After some stargazing and calculation, the computer tells me exactly what I wanted to hear: The Hail Mary is on a hyperbolic trajectory.

That means I'm not in orbit at all.

I'm on an escape vector, leaving Tau Ceti's gravity influence entirely.

And that means the object I'm tracking is also on an escape vector.

You know what objects in a solar system don't do?

They don't escape the star's gravity.

Anything going fast enough to escape did so billions of years ago.

Whatever this is, it's no normal asteroid.

"Yes yes yes yes..."

I say.

I kick the spin drives on and head toward the contact.

"I'm comin', buddy.

Hold tight."

When I'm within 500 kilometers, I finally get some resolution on the object.

All I see is a highly pixelated triangle.

It's four times as long as it is wide.

It's not much information, but it's enough.

It's the Blip-A.

I know the profile well.

I have a bag of Ilyukhina's vodka handy for just such an occasion.

I take a sip from the zip-straw.

I cough and wheeze.

Dang, she liked her liquor rough.

- Rocky's ship sits 50 meters off my starboard side.

I came up really carefully-I don't want to cross an entire solar system just to accidentally vaporize him with my engines.

I've matched velocities to within a few centimeters per second.

It's been almost three months since we parted.

From the outside, the Blip-A looks the same as it always has.

But something is definitely wrong.

I've tried everything to communicate.

Radio.

Flashes of spin- drive light.

Nothing gets a response.

I get a sinking feeling.

What if Rocky's dead?

He was all alone in there.

What if all heck broke loose while he was in a sleep cycle?

Eridians don't wake up until their bodies are ready.

What if the life-support system went offline while he was asleep and he just...never woke up?

What if he died of radiation sickness?

All that Astrophage that was protecting him from radiation turned into methane and Taumoeba.

Eridians are very susceptible to radiation.

It might have happened so fast he didn't have a chance to react.

I shake my head.

No.

He's Rocky.

He's smart.

He'd have backup plans.

A separate life-support system that he sleeps in, I bet.

And he'd account for radiation-it killed his entire crew.

But why no response?

He can't see.

He doesn't have windows.

He'd have to actively look outside with the Blip-A's sensory equipment to know I'm there at all.

Why would he do that?

He thinks he's hopelessly derelict in space.

EVA time.

I climb into the Orlan for what seems like the millionth time and cycle through the airlock.

I have a nice long tether anchored to the airlock interior itself.

I look out into the vast nothingness before me.

I can't see the Blip-A.

Tau Ceti is too far away to light things up.

I only know where the ship is because it blocks the background stars.

I'm just...out in space and a big chunk of it has no pinpricks of light.

There's no good way to do this.

I'm just going to have to take a guess.

I kick off the Hail Mary's hull as hard as I can, aiming for the Blip-A.

It's a big ship.

I just have to hit any part of it.

And hey, if I miss, the tether will bounce me back in the galaxy's first interstellar bungee jump.

I float across space.

The blackness ahead of me grows.

More and more stars disappear until I see nothing.

I don't even have a sense of movement.

I know logically I must have the same velocity as when I kicked off my ship.

But there's nothing to prove it.

Then, I spot a faint blotchy tan glow ahead.

I'm finally close enough to the Blip-A that my helmet lights are illuminating part of it.

It gets brighter and brighter.

I can see the hull more clearly now.

It's go time.

I have just seconds to find something to grab on to.

I know his hull has rails all over the place for that robot to get around.

I'm hoping I'll be close enough to one to grab.

I spot a rail dead ahead.

I reach out.

Slam!

I hit the Blip-A much harder than an EVA suit should.

I shouldn't have kicked off the Hail Mary with so much gusto.

I scrabble at the hull, grabbing for anything.

My plan to grab a rail failed miserably, I got a hand on one but just couldn't keep a grip.

I bounce and start drifting away.

The tether gets tangled up behind and around me.

It'll be a long climb back to my ship for another try.

Then I spot a weird, jagged protuberance on the hull a few meters away.

An antenna, maybe?

It's too far to reach with my hands, but maybe I can get it with the tether.

I'm drifting away from the hull at a slow but steady rate and I don't have a jetpack.

It's now or never.

I tie a quick slipknot in the tether and throw it at the antenna.

And, I'll be gosh darned, I nailed it!

I just wrangled an alien spaceship.

I pull the loop tight.

For a second, I worry it might break the antenna off, but then I see the blotchy tan texture.

The antenna (if that's what it is) is made of xenonite.

It's not going anywhere.

I pull myself along the tether to the hull.

This time, with the antenna and tether to aid me, I manage to grab hold of a nearby robot rail.

"Whew,"

I say.

I take a moment to catch my breath.

Now to put Rocky's hearing to the test.

I pull the biggest wrench I have from my tool belt.

I rear back and smack the hull.

Hard.

I smack it over and over.

Clank!

Clank!

Clank!

I hear the sound through my own EVA suit.

If he's alive in there, that'll get his attention.

I push one end of the wrench against the hull and crouch down to bring my helmet in contact with the other end.

I stretch my neck out in the helmet and push my chin against the faceplate.

"Rocky!"

I yell as loud as I can.

"I don't know if you can hear me!

But I'm here, buddy!

I'm on your hull!"

I wait a few seconds.

"I have my EVA suit radio on!

Same frequency as always!

Say something!

Let me know you're okay!"

I turn up my radio volume.

All I hear is static.

"Rocky!"

A crackle.

My ears perk up.

"Rocky?!"

"Grace, question?"

"Yes!"

I've never been so happy to hear a few musical notes!

"Yeah, buddy!

It's me!"

"You are here, question?!"

his voice is so high-pitched I can barely understand him.

But I understand Eridian pretty well now.

"Yes!

I'm here!"

"You are..."

he squeaks.

"You..."

he squeaks again.

"You are here!"

"Yes!

Set up the airlock tunnel!"

"Warning!

Taumoeba-82.5 is-"

"I know!

I know.

It can get through xenonite.

That's why I'm here.

I knew you'd be in trouble."

"You save me!"

"Yes.

I caught the Taumoeba in time.

I still have fuel.

Set up the tunnel.

I'm taking you to Erid."

"You save me and you save Erid!"

he squeaks.

"Set up the darn tunnel!"

"Get back in you ship!

Unless you want to look at tunnel from outside!"

"Oh, right!"

- I wait eagerly by the airlock door, trying to watch the action play out through the little window.

It's all happened before- Rocky attaching the airlock-to-airlock tunnel with the hull robot.

But this time it was a little more challenging.

I had to maneuver the Hail Mary into position because the Blip-A can't move at all.

Still, we got it done.

A final clank, then a hiss.

I know that sound!

I float into the airlock and check through the outer window.

The tunnel is in place.

He kept it all this time.

Why not?

It's an artifact from his species' first contact with alien life.

I'd keep it too!

I turn the emergency relief valve.

Air from my ship fills my half of the tunnel.

Once it equalizes, I throw open the door and fly in.

Rocky waits for me on the other side.

His clothes are a mess.

Covered in the all-too-familiar gunky Taumoeba residue.

And there are burns all along one side of his jumpsuit and two of his arms are in pretty bad shape.

Looks like he had a pretty rough time.

But his body language is sheer joy.

He bounces from handhold to handhold.

"I am very very very happy,"

he says with a high pitch.

I point to his bad arms.

"Are you hurt?!"

"I will heal.

Attempted many things to stop Taumoeba infestation.

All failed."

"I succeeded,"

I say.

"My ship isn't made of xenonite."

"What happen, question?"

I sigh.

"The Taumoeba evolved to resist nitrogen.

But it also evolved to get into xenonite to hide from nitrogen.

The side effect is Taumoeba-82.5 can work its way through xenonite over time."

"Amaze.

Now what, question?"

"I still have two million kilograms of Astrophage.

Bring your stuff aboard.

We're going to Erid."

"Happy!

Happy happy happy!"

He pauses.

"Need to make nitrogen wash.

Make sure no Taumoeba-82.5 get into Hail Mary."

"Yes.

I have full faith in your abilities.

Make a sterilizer."

He shifts from one set of bars to another.

Those burned arms are hurting him, I can tell.

"What about Earth, question?"

"I sent the beetles with the mini-farms.

Taumoeba-82.5 can't get through Eridian steel."

"Good good,"

he says.

"I make sure my people take good care of you.

They will make Astrophage maybe for you to go home!"

"Yeah..."

I say.

"About that...I'm not going home.

The beetles will save Earth.

But I won't ever see it again."

His joyous bouncing stops.

"Why, question?"

"I don't have enough food.

After I take you to Erid, I will die."

"You...you no can die."

His voice gets low.

"I no let you die.

We send you home.

Erid will be grateful.

You save everyone.

We do everything to save you."

"There's nothing you can do,"

I say.

"There's no food.

I have enough to last until we get to Erid and then a few months more.

Even if your government gave me the Astrophage to go home, I wouldn't survive the trip."

"Eat Erid food.

We evolve from same life.

We use same proteins.

Same chemicals.

Same sugars.

Must work!"

"No, I can't eat your food, remember?"

"You say is bad for you.

We find out."

I hold up my hands.

"It's not just bad for me.

It will kill me.

Your whole ecology uses heavy metals all over the place.

Most of them are toxic to me.

I'd die immediately."

He trembles.

"No.

You no can die.

You are friend."

I float closer to the divider wall and talk softly.

"It's okay.

I made my decision.

This is the only way to save both of our worlds."

He backs away.

"Then you go home.

Go home now.

I wait here.

Erid maybe send another ship someday."

"That's ridiculous.

Do you really want to risk the survival of your entire species on that guess?"

He's silent for a few moments and finally answers.

"No."

"Okay.

Get that ball thing you use as a spacesuit and come on over.

Talk me through how to patch up the xenonite walls.

Then you can move your stuff in-"

"Wait,"

he says.

"You no can eat Erid life.

You no have Earth life to eat.

What about Adrian life, question?"

I snort.

"Astrophage?

I can't eat that!

It's ninety-six degrees all the time!

It would burn me alive.

Plus, I doubt my digestive enzymes would even work on its weird cell membrane."

"Not Astrophage.

Taumoeba.

Eat Taumoeba."

"I can't eat-"

I pause.

"I...what?"

Can I eat Taumoeba?

It's alive.

It has DNA.

Is has mitochondria-the powerhouse of the cell.

It stores energy as glucose.

It does the Krebs cycle.

It's not Astrophage.

It's not 96 degrees.

It's just an amoeba from another planet.

It won't have heavy metals like Eridian life evolved to have-they aren't even present in Adrian's atmosphere.

"I...I don't know.

Maybe I can."

He points to his ship.

"I have twenty-two million kilograms of Taumoeba in fuel bays.

How much you want, question?"

I widen my eyes.

It's the first time I've felt genuine hope in a long time.

"Settled."

He puts his claw against the divider.

"Fist my bump."

I laugh and put my knuckles against the xenonite.

"Fist-bump.

It's just 'fist-bump.' "

"Understand."

I finish off the last bite of my meburger and gulp down the vitamin-enriched soda.

I put my dishes in the sink and check the clock on my kitchen wall.

Wow, is it V lI already?

I better hurry up.

My first few years on Erid were touch-and-go.

Taumoeba kept me alive, but I became severely malnourished.

The microbes gave me calories, but they weren't a balanced diet.

Those were painful days.

I had scurvy, beriberi, and a raft of other maladies.

Was it worth it?

I still don't know.

I might never know.

There's no way to communicate with Earth.

It's sixteen light-years away.

For all I know, the beetles may have malfunctioned or missed their target.

I don't even know if the climatologists like Leclerc were right in their models for what would happen.

The Hail Mary might have been hopeless from the get-go.

Earth might already be a frozen wasteland with billions of corpses.

But I try to stay positive.

What else have I got?

For what it's worth, the Eridians are fantastic hosts.

They don't have a government, per se, but all the important entities agreed to do whatever it takes to keep me alive.

After all, I played a critical role in saving their planet.

And even if I hadn't, I'm a living, breathing alien.

Of course they're going to keep me alive.

I'm of extreme scientific interest.

I live in a big dome in the middle of one of their "cities."

Though "city"

isn't quite the right word.

A better description might be a "cluster."

I have grounds and everything.

Thirty Eridians outside the dome maintain my life-support systems, or so I'm told.

And my dome is very close to one of the larger science centers.

Many of Erid's greatest minds collect there and thrum.

That's sort of a song and discussion in one.

But everyone talks at the same time and it's not really conscious on their part.

Somehow the thrum leads to conclusions and decisions.

The thrum itself is much smarter than any Eridian in it.

In a way, Eridians can become ad-hoc neurons in a group mind.

But they come and go as they please.

I'm particularly interesting, so pretty much every scientist on the planet came together to thrum up ways to keep me alive.

I'm told it was the second-largest science-oriented thrum ever executed.

(The largest, of course, was when they had to make a plan for dealing with Astrophage.) Thanks to my Earth scientific journals, they know all my nutritional needs and how to synthesize the various vitamins in labs.

Once they solved that, smaller, less-focused groups worked on making them taste better.

That's more or less up to me, actually.

Lots of taste tests.

Glucose, common to both Eridian and Human biomes, comes up a lot.

The best thing, though, is they managed to clone my muscle tissue and grow it in labs.

I can thank Earth science for that.

They were nowhere near that technology when I first showed up.

But that was sixteen years ago-they're catching up quite well.

Anyway, it means I can finally eat meat.

Yes, that's right, I'm eating human meat.

But it's my own meat, and I don't feel bad about it.

Spend a decade eating nothing but odd-tasting, vaguely sweet vitamin shakes and then see if you'll turn down a burger.

I love meburgers.

I eat one every day.

I grab my cane and head out.

I'm not a young man anymore, and the high gravity of Erid has only made my bones degenerate faster.

I think I'm fifty-three years old now, but I'm not sure.

I've done a lot of time-dilated travel.

I can accurately say seventy-one years have gone by on Earth since I was born, for what it's worth.

I leave through my front door and cross the grounds.

There are no plants or anything-I'm the only thing on this planet that can survive my environment.

But there are some very tasteful and aesthetically pleasing rocks.

It's become a hobby of mine: making the grounds as pretty as possible.

The Eridians just see a bunch of rocks, but I see all the colors.

They installed lights at the top of the dome that get brighter and dimmer on a twenty-four-hour cycle.

I explained that's critical to my mood and they took my word for it.

Though I did have to explain to this species of interstellar travelers how to make lightbulbs.

I make my way along the gravel pathway to one of the many "meeting"

rooms at the dome's wall.

Eridians value face-to- carapace communication as much as humans do, and this is a good compromise.

My side is within my bubble environment.

And on the other side of the 1-centimeter clear xenonite is a room that's out in Erid's natural atmosphere.

I hobble in.

It's one of the smaller meeting rooms, really only suitable for a one-on-one conversation.

But it's become our go- to spot for meeting up.

Rocky waits for me on the Eridian side.

"Finally!

I've been waiting for l minutes!

What took you so long?!"

I can understand Eridian fluently now, of course.

And Rocky is equally fluent in English comprehension.

"I'm old.

Give me a break.

It takes me a while to get ready in the morning."

"Oh, you had to eat, right?"

Rocky says, a tinge of disgust in his voice.

"You told me not to talk about that in polite company."

"I'm not polite company, my friend!"

I snicker.

"So what's up?"

He wiggles and jiggles.

I've almost never seen him this excited.

"I just heard from the Astronomy hive.

They have news!"

I hold my breath.

"Sol?

Is it about Sol?!"

"Yes!"

he squeals.

"Your star has returned to full luminance!"

I gasp.

"Are you sure?

Like, Ill percent certainty?"

"Yes.

The data was analyzed by a thrum of V astronomers.

It checks out."

I can't move.

I can barely breathe.

I start to tremble.

It's over.

We won.

Simple as that.

Sol-Earth's sun-has returned to its pre-Astrophage brightness.

There's only one possible way that happens: Astrophage is gone.

Or at least reduced in population so much that it doesn't matter.

We won.

We did it!

Rocky cocks his carapace.

"Hey, your face is leaking!

I haven't seen that in a long-ass time!

Remind me-does that mean you're happy or sad?

'Cause it can mean either one, right?"

"I'm happy, of course!"

I sob.

"Yeah, I thought so.

Just checking."

He holds a balled claw against the xenonite.

"Is this a fist-bump situation?"

I press my knuckles to the xenonite as well.

"This is a monumentally epic fist-bump situation."

"I guess your scientists got right on it,"

he says.

"If you account for the time it took your beetles to get there and the travel time for light to get from Sol to Erid...I think it took less than one of your years to get it done."

I nod.

It's still sinking in.

"So will you go home now?

Or will you stay?"

The...entities...that make major decisions for Erid long ago offered to refuel the Hail Mary.

It's still sitting in a nice, stable orbit around Erid, where it's been since Rocky and I first arrived all those years ago.

The Eridians could stock it up with food and supplies, help me make sure everything is working right, and send me on my way.

But so far I haven't taken them up on it.

It's a long, lonely journey, and until a minute ago I didn't even know if Earth was still habitable.

Erid may not be where I'm from, but at least I have friends here.

"I...I don't know.

I'm getting old and the trip is long."

"Speaking from a selfish perspective, I hope you stay.

But that's just me."

"Rocky...that news about Sol...it...it makes my whole life have meaning.

You know?

I still can't...I can't..."

I start sobbing again.

"Yeah, I know.

That's why I wanted to be the one to tell you."

I check my watch.

(Yes, the Eridians made me a wristwatch.

They make anything I ask for.

I try not to abuse it.) "I have to go.

I'm late.

But...Rocky..."

"I know,"

he says, tilting his carapace in what I've come to realize is a smile.

"I know.

We'll talk more about it later.

I have to get home anyway.

Adrian is going to sleep soon, so I have to be there to watch."

We both head toward our respective exits, but he pauses.

"Hey, Grace.

Do you ever wonder?

About other life out there?"

I lean on my cane.

"Sure, all the time."

He walks back in.

"I keep thinking about it.

The theories are pretty hard to dispute.

Some ancestor of Astrophage seeded Earth and Erid with life billions of years ago."

"Yeah,"

I say.

"And I know where you're going with this."

"Do you?"

"Yeah."

I shift my weight from one leg to the other.

Arthritis is starting to settle in my joints.

High gravity isn't great for humans.

"There are fewer than fifty stars as close to Tau Ceti as we are.

But two of them ended up with life.

It means life-at least, the life Tau Ceti puts out-might be a lot more common in our galaxy than we think."

"Think we'll find more of them?

Intelligent species?"

"Who knows?"

I say.

"You and I found each other.

That's something."

"Yeah,"

he says.

"It really is something.

Go do your job, old man."

"Later, Rocky."

"Later!"

I hobble out of the room and make my way along the perimeter of the dome.

They made the whole thing out of clear xenonite because they thought that's what I would want.

But it doesn't matter.

It's pitch-dark outside all the time.

Sure, I can shine a flashlight out there and occasionally see an Eridian going about his business.

But I don't get sweeping vistas of mountains or anything.

Just inky blackness.

My smile fades a little.

How bad did it get back on Earth?

Did they work together to survive?

Or did millions die in wars and famine?

They were able to collect the beetles, read my information, and implement a solution.

A solution that would have involved a probe going to Venus.

So there's definitely some advanced infrastructure still there.

I bet they did work together.

Maybe it's just the childish optimist in me, but humanity can be pretty impressive when we put our minds to it.

After all, everyone worked together to build the Hail Mary.

That was no easy feat.

I hold my head up high.

Maybe I will go home someday.

Maybe I'll find out for sure.

But not right now.

Right now, I've got work to do.

I continue along the path to the large double doors leading to another meeting space.

And I have to say, it's my favorite one.

I step into the chamber.

About one-fifth of the room is my Earth environment.

The other side of the divider wall has thirty little Eridians bouncing around like idiots.

Each one is no more than thirty Earth years old.

The selection process for which ones get to attend...well...again, Eridian culture is complicated.

An Earthlike organ keyboard sits in the center of my area, oriented such that the operator faces the kids.

The organ has quite a few more options than a typical keyboard found on Earth.

I can apply inflection, tone, mood, and all the other little intricacies of spoken language.

I settle into the comfortable chair, crack my knuckles, and start the class.

"All right, all right,"

I play.

"Everyone settle down and get in your seats."

They scamper to their assigned desks and sit quietly, ready for the lesson to begin.

"Who here can tell me the speed of light?"

Twelve kids raise their claws.

FOR JOHN, PAUL, GEORGE, AND RINGO I' d like to thank the following people who helped me get the science as accurate as possible: Andrew Howell, for helping me with astronomy and stellar sciences.

Jim Green, for explaining the basics of planetary science and how atmospheres work.

Shawn Goldman, for telling me all about exoplanet detection.

Charles Duba (who I actually went to high school with!), for explaining complex details about neutrinos.

And finally, Cody Don Reeder, for giving me vital chemistry information and also being an all-around cool guy to exchange emails with.

On the book front, I'd like to thank my agent, David Fugate, for always having my back.

Also, Julian Pavia, my editor on this book and so far all of my books.

And Sarah Breivogel, who has handled publicity for my books since day one.

And I'd like to thank my eclectic group of beta readers: My mother, Janet, who loves everything I do; Duncan Harris, who questions every plot point and keeps me honest; and Dan Snyder, who...wait.

You never got back to me, Dan!

What, am I not good enough for you!?

And I'd like to thank my wife, Ashley, for putting up with god-knows how many conversations about possible plot and story structure ideas and always giving me wise feedback.

BY ANDY WEIR Project Hail Mary Artemis The Martian ABOUT THE AUTHOR A W built a career as a software engineer until the success of his first published novel, The Martian, allowed him to live out his dream of writing full- time.

He is a lifelong space nerd and a devoted hobbyist of subjects such as relativistic physics, orbital mechanics, and the history of manned spaceflight.

He also mixes a mean cocktail.

He lives in California.

Twitter: @andyweirauthor Wat's next on your reading list?

Discover your next great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.

Sign up now.

--- NEXT VOLUME ---

THE CHRONICLES OF THOMAS COVENANT \ DN DOMALDSON INTO TERA Stephen R.

Donaldson's The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant is one of the most acclaimed fantasy series of our time, with penetrating insight into the darkest secrets of the human soul.

Now Donaldson turns his storytelling mastery to an intense new five-volume series of the far future, beginning with...

THE GAP INTO CONFLICT: THE REAL STORY Angus Thermopyle was an ore pirate and a murderer; even the most disreputable asteroid pilots of Delta Sector stayed out of his way.

They muttered that everyone who had ever gotten close to Thermopyle had ended up dead-or in the lockup.

But when he arrived at Mallorys Bar & Sleep with a gorgeous woman by his side, the regulars had to take notice.

She was too beautiful, too obviously from a different class.

Her name was Morn Hyland, and she had been a police officer-until she showed up with Thermopyle.

One person in Mallorys Bar wasn't frightened.

Nick Succorso had his own ship, a Sleek frigate fitted for deep space.

He had a reputation as a bold pirate, but not a bloodthirsty one.

And he had the kind of charisma that made men follow him and women want him.

Only the scars beneath his eyes-brutal knife cuts that darkened when his blood rose- indicated that he'd ever known defeat.

You could almost feel the tension when he first saw Morn Hyland.

Everyone Knew that Thermopyle and Succorso were on a collision course.

What nobody suspected was how quickly it would all be over-or how decisive the victory would be.

It was a common enough example of rivalry and revenge- or so everyone thought.

But the real story was something entirely different...

(Continued on back flap) fee GAP LNaBOe CON ELI CT: Pisin Na k-o/ Asien Sate aie)' OTHER BOOKS BY STEPHEN R.

DONALDSON THE CHRONICLES OF THOMAS COVENANT Book One: Lord Foul's Bane Book Two: The Illearth War Book Three: The Power That Preserves THE SECOND CHRONICLES OF THOMAS COVENANT Book One: The Wounded Land Book Two: The One Tree Book Three: White Gold Wielder DAUGHTER OF REGALS AND OTHER TALES MORDANT'S NEED Volume One: The Mirror of Her Dreams Volume Two: A Man Rides Through STEPHEN , DONALDS(N oh i ee moet INTO ,CONFLICT: TH REAL STORY BANTAM BOOKS NEW YORK * TORONTO # LONDON  SYDNEY * AUCKLAND Book design by Maria Carella.

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted"

in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

For information address: Bantam Books.

Publishing Group, Inc.

Its trademark, consisting of the words "Bantam Books"

and the portrayal of a rooster, is Registered in U.S.

Patent and Trademark Office and in other countries.

Marca Registrada.

Bantam Books, 666 Fifth Avenue, New York, New York 10103.

Quality Printing and Binding by: ARCATA GRAPHICS/KINGSPORT Press and Roller Streets Kingsport, TN 37662 U.S.A.

i Je Wr / i Va) Brie be G& ome Bes : cS fee ey lN | Or CON EEL Clr fede ee ee) een eis Crris Asa es : ON Fn VI ost of the crowd at Mallorys Bar & Sleep over in Delta Sector had no idea what was really going on.

As far as they were concerned, it was just another example of animal passion, men and women driven together by lust-the kind of thing everybody understood, or at least dreamed about.

The only uncommon feature was that in this case the passion included some common sense.

Only a few people knew there was more to it.

Curiosity wasn't a survival trait in DelSec; it certainly wasn't the pleasure it might have been in Alpha, Com-Mine Station's alternative enter- tainment/lodging Sector.

Laidover miners, discredited asteroid pilots, drunks and dreamers, and a number of men who never admitted to being ore pirates -the people who either didn't fit or weren't welcome in Alpha-all had learned incuriosity the hard way.

They considered themselves too smart to ask the wrong questions in the wrong places, to notice the wrong things at the wrong times.

None of them wanted trouble.

For them, the story was basically simple.

It began when Morn Hyland came into Mallorys with Angus Thermopyle.

Those two called attention to themselves because they obviously didn't belong together.

Except for her ill-fitting and outdated shipsuit, which she must have scrounged from someone else's locker, she was gorgeous, with THE URCETA LS THO RY 4 a body that made drunks groan in lost yearning and a pale, delicate beauty of - face that twisted dreamers' hearts.

In contrast, he was dark and disreputable, probably the most disreputable man who still had docking-rights at the Sta- tion.

His swarthy features were broad and stretched, a frog-face with stiff whiskers and streaks of grease.

Between his powerful arms and scrawny legs, his middle bulged like a tire, inflated with bile and malice.

In fact, no one knew how he had been able to keep his docking-rights -or his tincan freighter, for that matter-as long as he had.

According to his reputation, anyone who ever became his companion, crew, or enemy ended up either dead or in lockup.

Most people who knew him predicted he would end up that way himself-dead, or in lockup until he rotted.

He and Morn looked so grotesque together she staying with him despite the clear disgust on her face, he ordering her around like a slavey while his yellowish eyes gleamed that none of the men nearby could resist a little harmless scheming, a bit of gap-eyed speculation.

If I could get her away from him- If she were mine- But the story was just beginning.

No one was surprised by the nearly tangible current which sparked across the crowd when she and Nick Succorso spotted each other for the first time.

In a number of ways, Nick Succorso was the most desirable man in DelSec.

He had his own ship, a sleek little frigate with a gap drive and an experienced crew.

He had the kind of piratical reputation that allowed him to seem bold rather than bloodthirsty.

His personal magnetism made men do what he asked and women offer what he wanted.

And the only flaws in his cavalier handsomeness were the scars under his eyes, the cuts which under- lined everything he saw and grew dark whenever he saw something he in- tended to have.

Some people said he'd inflicted those cuts himself, just for effect-but that was merely envy and spite.

No one could be as desirable as Nick without inspiring a few snide remarks.

The truth was that he'd received those scars years ago, the only time he'd ever been bested.

They'd been put on him to mar him, a sign of 'con- tempt for his upstart arrogance: the woman who gave them to him hadn't considered him worth killing.

But he'd learned from them.

He'd learned never to be beaten again; learned to make sure that all his contests were unequal, in his favor.

He'd learned to wait until he was in control of what happened.

Common sense.

Members of his crew later admitted that they'd never seen his scars go as dark as when he spotted Morn Hyland.

And her pale beauty ached toward him instantly-passion or desperation-bringing brightness to eyes which were dull in Angus Thermopyle's company.

The only surprise was that neither of them did anything about it.

The electricity between them was so ST -E Pi Ft EN SRD FORN BAKE Des OnN strong that the spectators wouldn't have been taken aback if Morn and Nick had thrown off their clothes and jumped for each other right there in the bar.

Most of the crowd had no idea what restrained them.

She was a mystery, of course.

But he certainly didn't have a reputation for restraint.

Nearly two weeks later, however, they did what everyone was waiting for.

When Com-Mine Security broke into Mallorys and charged Angus Thermopyle with a crime serious enough to make an arrest succeed even in DelSec, Morn Hyland was suddenly at Nick's side.

And just as suddenly they were gone.

Lust and common sense.

Their charged flesh drew them together; and she got away from Angus at just the right moment.

They left to become the kind of story drunks and dreamers told each other early in the Station's standard morning, when Mallorys was quiet and the thin alloy walls seemed safe against the hard vacuum of space and the luring madness of the gap.

The last anyone heard, Angus was rotting as predicted under a life sentence in the Station lockup.

That, of course, was not the real story.

Tite eau TLOFRY esa < esky ore | fe CHAPTER Ni at4 = Z Fl ta a ee , t ON Fn Sen of the people who lurked in the dim light knew better.

They were the ones in the corners who drank less than they appeared to, smoked less, talked less.

Pushing their mugs around in the condensation which oozed off the plastic because the air processing in DelSec was never as good as it should be and nobody could sit in Mallorys without sweating, these men knew how to listen, how to ask questions, how to interpret what they saw-and when to go somewhere else for information.

Most of them were a bit older, a bit less self-absorbed; perhaps a bit more profound in their cynicism.

If they were pilots, they were here because - this was the life they could afford and understand, not because drink or drugs, incompetence or misjudgment, had cost them their careers.

If they were miners who couldn't get or no longer wanted work, they were here to stay near the taste and dreams of prospecting, the vision of a strike so vast and pure that it was better than being rich.

If they were born or naturalized inhabitants of the Station, they were here to keep company with the clientele for their particular goods or services-or perhaps to keep tabs on the market for the whispers and hints they purveyed.

Such people looked at what they saw with more discerning eyes.

When Morn Hyland and Angus Thermopyle came into Mallorys, the men in the corners noticed the way her whole body seemed to twist away JT HAEARCECA LAS TOR Y: 10 even when she sat close beside him.

They heard the dull, almost lifeless sound of her voice when she spoke-a tone of suppression unexpected from someone who had presumably spent weeks or months away from people and drink.

And they observed that he kept one hand constantly fisted in the pocket of his grease-stained shipsuit.

After Angus took her out, some of these men also left-but not to follow.

Instead, they went to have unassuming, apparently casual conversa- tions with people who had access to the id files in Com-Mine Station's computers.

The story they gleaned concerned something more interesting than animal passion and common sense.

By one means or another, they learned that there was a perfectly reasonable explanation for the fact that Morn Hyland wasn't known in Del- Sec.

She'd never been there before.

During her one previous layover on Com- Mine, she'd stayed in AlSec.

She'd come out from Earth on one of the really wealthy independent oreliners, a family operation so successful that she and all her relatives did everything first class because they could afford it.

Crossing the gap, the Hylands had docked at Com-Mine Station, not to pick up company ore for the orbiting smelters around Earth, but to buy supplies: they were headed for the belt themselves.

And since they weren't experienced miners and had never been out to the belt before, there could only be one explanation for what they were doing.

Somewhere they had bought or stolen the location of an asteroid rich enough to tempt them away from their usual runs.

They had caught the dream themselves and were on their way to test it against the bitter rock of the belt.

A common tale, as far as it went.

Back on Earth, civilization and political power required ore.

Without the resources which stations like Com- Mine supplied, no government could maintain itself in office.

By some stan- dards, the United Mining Companies, Com-Mine's corporate founder, was the only effective government in human space.

As a natural consequence, every city or station of any size spawned at least one earnest, spurious, or reprobate dealer in belt charts, the treasure maps of space.

Men and women with some kind of hunger in their bellies were forever buying "accurate,"

"secret"

charts and then risking everything to cross the gap and go prospect- ing.

But not a successful outfit like the Hyland family.

If they left a profit- able ore-transportation business and converted their liner for mining, two things were certain.

They had a chart.

S'T-E.P FOGEN <R 4 /DZOINBARL DS ON 1] The chart was good.

AlSec must have been on fire with that kind of news.

Otherwise DelSec would never have heard about it.

Specifically, Angus would never have heard about it.

As a general rule, the snobs, corporate barons, govern- ment ofhcials, intellectuals, and high-class illegals who frequented AlSec didn't share information with the denizens of Delta Sector.

And Angus Thermopyle had probably never been in AlSec in his life.

Human nature being what it was, greed and a casual indifference to scruple would have inspired any number of mine jumpers or pirates to follow the Hyland ship, Starmaster, when she left Com-Mine Station.

But jumpers and pirates had harried Com-Mine's legitimate prospectors and liners for so long-and the battles which took place as outgoing ships fought to keep from being followed had become so fierce-that now the Station itself as a matter of policy fired on any ship which tried to pursue any other ship out of dock.

To all appearances, the Hylands got away safely.

Appearances must have deceived them, however.

Or else they were simply outsmarted.

They had no experience with the belt, or mining, or jumpers, or pirates.

And Angus Thermopyle had become as rich as the stars without ever doing a lick of honest work-and without ever having to share his wealth with any partners, backers, or crew.

The Hyland ship never came back.

But Morn Hyland came back.

She came back with Angus.

With a dull, almost lifeless tone to her voice, and an air of being repulsed by his physical closeness.

And he kept one fist knotted like a threat in the pocket of his shipsuit.

The men who observed these things had no other way to account for them, so they jumped to the one conclusion which made sense to them; a conclusion which suited both Angus' reputation and their own cynicism.

Without any viable external evidence, they chose to believe that he'd given her a zone implant.

He had the control in his pocket.

Zone implants were illegal, of course.

They were so illegal that unau- thorized use carried the death penalty.

But-also of course-mere questions of legality didn't stop people who worked the belt from having them on hand for emergencies.

In essence, a zone implant was a radio electrode which could be slipped between one of the skull sutures and installed in the brain, where its emissions were remarkably effective.

It had been invented by a doctor trying to control grand mal epileptic seizures: its emissions blanked out the neural storm of the seizure.

People thought that was where the name "zone"

came from: an active implant gave an epileptic the look of being "completely dq HfEMR.ECA LYS TO RY 12+ zoned."

But in fact medical research had quickly discovered that a variety of results could be obtained by varying the implant's emissions-by tuning the implant to different zones of the brain.

Violent insanities could be tamed.

Manic behaviors could be moderated.

Catatonia could be relieved-or in- duced.

Recalcitrance could be turned into cooperation.

Pain could be reinter- preted as pleasure.

Volition could be suppressed.

Without interrupting consciousness or coordination.

Given a broad-spectrum zone implant, which employed several elec- trodes, and an unscrupulous control operator, independent human beings could be transformed into intelligent, effective, and loyal slaves.

Even the more common, narrower-spectrum implants could achieve comparable results by turning people into physical puppets, or by applying intense neural pun- ishments and rewards.

Unauthorized use of a zone implant carried the death penalty auto- matically, inevitably; without appeal.

But despite the law-and the possibilities of abuse-even otherwise reputable miners and pilots, orehaulers and -handlers, considered zone im- plants necessary medical equipment.

The reason was simple.

Medical science had developed ways for com- plete idiots to diagnose and treat complex diseases; ways for lost or vision- struck belt pilots to repair the damage done to their bodies by faulty or inadequate equipment; ways for crushed limbs and even crushed organs to be prosthetically restored.

Unfortunately, however, no amount of research had discovered a cure for gap-sickness, that strange breakdown of the mind which took perhaps one out of every hundred people who crossed the dimensional gap and reduced him or her to a psychotic killer or a null-wave transmitter, a raving bulimic or a gleeful self-flagellant, a pedophiliac or a pill-junkie.

Appar- ently, one out of every hundred people had some kind of undetectable vulner- ability in the tissue of the brain; and when that vulnerability was translated across light-years of space through the imponderable physics of the gap, something happened to it.

Otherwise healthy individuals lost command of their lives in invariably startling, often grotesque, and sometimes murderous fashions.

There was no cure for gap-sickness.

But there was a way to cope with it.

The zone implant.

; Ships and prospecting and mining operations were too fragile: every individual's life depended on everybody else.

For that reason, perfectly sane and law-abiding people considered it an unacceptable risk to cross the gap or Ss TE Pe.

EFN SR wD sORN EARL Dist Onn tide dark space without access to zone implants.

Just in case the person standing right over there suddenly picked up a hose and started to spray mineral acid in all directions.

"Authorized use"

of a zone implant occurred when the whole crew of a ship or the entire population of a mining camp testified that they would all have died if they hadn't used the implant to control a case of gap-sickness- and when the person with the implant confirmed that he or she hadn't been deprived of volition in any other situations.

The UMC Police enforced the principle of "authorized use"

with almost gleeful impartiality.

In part for that reason, actual, proven cases of abuse were rare.

But there were always stories.

So-and-so hit a rich strike on an asteroid so far away that it was off the charts, so far away that he and his crew didn't have enough provisions to stay and mine it-a problem he solved by giving everyone else zone implants and making them work without food or water or sleep until they died.

Such-and-such was prospecting alone and contrived to smash his leg with his ship's cargo boom; in pain and delirious, he neglected normal medical treatment and instead supplied himself with a zone implant in order to change the pain into pleasure-with the result that he became so happy he lost his mind and bled to death.

What the men in the bars and sleeps of DelSec talked about most often, however, was women.

Women were rare on mining stations.

Single women were even rarer.

And available women were so rare that they were prohibitively expensive; which meant that most of them lived in AlSec.

Men with nothing better to do rarely thought about anything else.

Gorgeous women.

Astonishing women.

Women with zone implants, who did every- thing a drink-fuddled or cynical mind could imagine.

Because they didn't have any choice, no matter how much they may have hated what was hap- pening to them.

Women like Morn Hyland.

So what must have happened was that Angus Thermopyle found a way to follow the Hyland ship when it left Com-Mine Station.

After all, who knew how much sophisticated tracking equipment he had hidden away aboard his scruffy, rattletrap freighter?

With all the mines he was said to have jumped, all the ore he was believed to have pirated, all the ships he was reputed to have wrecked, his financial resources must have been enormous.

He could surely afford things over which even a successful swashbuckler like Nick Succorso could only drool.

Obviously, he wasn't spending the money on himself.

Anybody who had to sit near him in Mal- lorys would have sworn he hadn't changed his shipsuit since the invention of TAZEWRIECA.

LBS TF: ORY 1+ the gap drive.

He never bought expensive drinks-or more than a few cheap ones.

And he absolutely never bought expensive women.

As for his ship, which he called by the odd, inapt name, Bright Beauty, no one ever saw inside her; but her exterior plate and ports and antennae and scanners looked like they had been driven through a meteor shower and then left to corrode.

In fact, the only discernible care he took of her-the only hint he gave that he had any interest in her at all-was to keep her name freshly painted in crisp black letters on either side of her command module.

What was he doing with all that money?

What else?

He must be investing it in his "business,"

using it to buy the kind of vacuum sniffers and particle sifters and doppler sensors that most ~ pilots who frequented Com-Mine Station only knew about by rumor; the kind of equipment which would allow him to follow the Hyland ship without making either her or the Station itself suspicious.

There were still questions unanswered.

Everyone knew that a ship the size of Bright Beauty needed at least two people and preferably six to run her.

Assuming that Morn Hyland worked for him on his return, Angus must still have had a crew of some kind when he left on Starmaster's trail.

Who was it?

Presumably, it must have been someone who had managed to get on and off Com-Mine Station without id processing, since Bright Beauty had no crew of record in the computer.

So what happened to him?

Or them?

What happened to the Hyland ship and all the rest of her people?

No one knew.

But Angus Thermopyle must have followed them to their strike.

He must have jumped them somehow-wrecked the ship, ma- rooned or murdered the family.

And spared Morn because under the persua- sion of the zone implant she was as desirable as any vision.

Because-so speculation ran-he hated her.

It was nothing personal, of course.

He hated everything.

He hated everybody.

The people who watched for such things could smell it on him.

His life was a stew of hate, destructive and unpredictable.

Now his hate was fixed on her, and he desired the thing he hated.

He wanted her to be what only a zone implant could make her.

Beautiful and revolted.

Capable of any degradation his filthy appetites could conceive-and able to be hurt by it.

The few men in Mallorys who realized what they considered the truth about her were sickened by it.

Being of various moral characters themselves, some of them probably considered it evil.

The rest probably considered it evil that the control to her implant was in Angus Thermopyle's pocket.

On this subject, Nick Succorso kept his opinion to himself.

Perhaps his attraction to Morn was so strong that he didn't think about anything else.

STE PH EIN eR 4 FDSOUNSAUL fasten Despite his attraction, however, and his reputation for success, he was probably restrained from immediate action by the prospect of what Angus might do if he were challenged.

To Morn Hyland, of course.

But also to whoever challenged him.

He had a history of getting rid of his enemies.

So instead of leaping to her rescue, Nick waited and plotted.

He may have been a criminal or a rogue hero, an operative or a mercenary; but he certainly wasn't stupid.

And he had no taste at all for defeat.

What he wanted-so the discerning cynics assumed-was to have Angus arrested by Security with the control to Morn's zone implant in his pocket.

Angus would get the death penalty; the implant would be removed; and then Morn Hyland would be free to give Nick Succorso the only reward he could possibly want.

Herself.

The hard part was to arrange for Angus to be arrested.

He wasn't an easy victim.

Piracy, treachery, and murder were what he did best.

Nevertheless Nick arranged it.

Once again, the only explanations available were purely speculative.

In the Station lockup, Angus wasn't talking to anybody.

And Nick Succorso and his crew were gone, taking Morn Hyland with them.

But here specula- tion was on fairly solid ground.

Knowing Nick, it was possible to guess with considerable confidence what he would do.

His background was vague.

His id files managed to look both perfectly legitimate and plainly spurious, revealing nothing.

All most people knew was that one day he docked his pretty frigate, Captain's Fancy, in Com-Mine Station, passed inspection, led his crew into DelSec, selected Mallorys Bar & Sleep apparently at random, and became a regular whenever he was on sta- tion.

Only the men in the corners, the men who pried below the surface, heard how he had passed inspection.

Being neither asleep nor blind, the Station inspectors had noticed almost immediately that Captain's Fancy had a hole the size of a gaming table in her side.

You've been hit, they said.

That looks like matter cannon fire.

It is, he replied.

Why were you being shot at?

I wasn't.

No?

The inspectors suggested intense skepticism.

No.

I was trying to get inside one of those awkward asteroids-too small for heavy equipment, too big to be chewed up by hand-cutters.

So I decided to try blasting it apart.

Somehow, the matter beam hit a glazed surface and reflected back.

Nick grinned amiably.

I shot myself.

q PARE MRGEWA (LES TH@ RY 16 That doesn't sound very plausible, Captain Succorso.

Hand over your - computer's datacore, and we'll verify your story.

No, he said again.

Now his grin didn't look so amiable.

I'm not required to let you look at my datacore unless you have evidence of a crime.

That's the law.

Has there been a crime?

In the end, Nick passed.

The ship that shot him must have been burned out of space in return, so it was never able to report that a crime had been committed.

Smiling to make DelSec's women's hearts flutter, basking in the devo- tion of his crew, and spending money as if he had a UMC credit line, he settled into Mallorys and concentrated on enjoying himself while Captain's Fancy was repaired.

He seemed to have a talent for enjoying himself, and his good humor-like his unmistakable virility-was infectious.

Only people who watched the scars under his eyes could tell that he was engaged in anything more serious than a continuous carouse.

And in Mallorys that "anything"

could be only one thing: he was listening, sifting, sorting, evaluating; making contact with sources of information.

Whenever he left Com-Mine Station, he left suddenly.

And when he came back, he celebrated.

By some coincidence, unfamiliar ships had a tendency to go "over- due"

while he was away.

Even a null-wave transmitter could have predicted that everything inside Nick would leap up at the sight of Morn Hyland.

If he was a pirate, he was the glamorous kind, the kind who slashed and burned his way to virtue in - romantic videos.

And she was beautiful and pathetic-a maiden in distress if ever there was one, abused and helpless.

Not to mention the fact that she belonged to someone else, a pirate rumored to be even more successful than Nick Succorso himself.

But only the people who didn't know any better were surprised that he didn't try to rescue her right away.

The men in the corners could guess what he would do.

He wouldn't try to steal her directly.

He was too smart for that.

In other words, he had too much respect for Angus Thermopyle's defenses.

And Angus kept his vulnerabilities-as well as his debaucheries-private by seal- ing them safely aboard Bright Beauty.

Station Security itself would have come to his assistance if Nick had tried to get past his alarms.

No, Nick would sit and listen, watching Morn Hyland until his scars turned black and waiting for his chance; waiting for Angus Thermopyle to make a move.

He wanted to see that move coming and know what it would be.

He wanted to do what Security had never been able to do-penetrate Angus' S.T-E P AE NAR "DSO% NBAMEID-S ON secrecy.

And when he knew what Angus' move would be, he would follow it so that he could betray it.

The moment in which Angus was arrested might be Nick's only realistic opportunity to carry Morn away.

He wanted her.

He also wanted to prove himself against Angus Thermopyle.

If he had other reasons, he never gave a hint of them to DelSec.

As it happened, his chance came sooner than he may have expected.

Maybe Angus felt cocky with Morn beside him and wanted to show off.

Or maybe he was getting greedy-if in fact he could conceivably be any greedier _ than he was already.

Or maybe the bait was just too attractive to be ignored.

Whatever the reason, he made his move scarcely two weeks after he first brought Morn into Mallorys.

The incoming supply ship from Earth-arriving several weeks early for some reason-was in trouble.

Every receiver in or around the Station picked up the distress call before it went dead.

Apparently one of the crew had been taken by gap-sickness.

As the ship reentered normal space, this unfortunate individual had become entranced by the idea of installing a crowbar in the memory bank of the navigational computer.

By the time his shipmates got him under control, the ship could no longer steer and had no idea where she was.

The fact that the distress call went dead seemed to imply that the damage to the computer-perhaps a fire-had spread to the com- munication gear.

In other words, a full standard year's worth of food, equipment, and medicine was floating out there somewhere against the background of the stars, ripe to be rescued, salvaged, or gutted.

Of course, as soon as the emergency was understood, Com-Mine Center slapped a curfew onto the docks, forbidding any ship to leave until she could be sworn in as part of the official search; until Security personnel could be put aboard to watch the actions of the crew.

That was standard procedure.

And it was generally respected, even by pirates and jumpers.

Ships that shared in the search also shared in the reward, regardless of which vessel actually performed the rescue, while ships that violated curfew, refused to cooperate, or went off on their own became targets by law and could be fired on with impunity.

This time, only Bright Beauty and Captain's Fancy took that chance.

Somehow, both Angus Thermopyle and Nick Succorso managed to uncouple from their berths seconds before the injunction of the curfew, thus preserv- ing at least the illusion of authorized departure.

Center wasn't impressed by illusions, however.

Commands to return and redock were broadcast: warning shots were fired.

FT JHAEVLRIECA L&S TF OR Y With contemptuous ease, Captain's Fancy winked off the scanners of the Station.

Nick Succorso disappeared by performing a delicate maneuver called a "blink crossing."

No one in Mallorys doubted his ability to do this.

In essence, he engaged his gap drive-and then disengaged it a fraction of a second later, thereby forcing his ship to "blink"

past fifty or a hundred thousand kilometers.

It was risky: there was always the chance that dimen- sional stress would tear the ship apart, or that he would come out of the gap in a gravity well he couldn't escape.

But it worked.

He got away.

From the look of her, Bright Beauty would never have withstood that much pressure.

In any case, she had no gap drive.

Angus Thermopyle took a completely different approach.

As soon as the first warning shots were fired, he started transmitting a distress call of his own.

Every receiver in or around the Station picked that one up too.

There's a short somewhere.

Smoke.

Controls are locked-I can't navigate.

Don't shoot.

I'm trying to come around.

No one believed him, of course.

But Center couldn't afford to ignore the possibility that he might be telling the truth.

That idea had to be consid- ered, at least for a few seconds.

And during those few seconds Angus cut in thrust boosters no one knew he had.

No one thought he had them because no one believed Bright Beauty could survive that kind of acceleration.

Like Nick, he got away.

After that, there were no more answers for a while.

The people who were following the story could speculate, but for two days they had nothing to base their speculations on.

Then Bright Beauty came limping back.

Her sides were scarred with matter cannon fire, and her thrust drive stuttered badly.

Nevertheless she passed inspection.

Angus Thermopyle faced down a board of inquiry.

After a few hours, he brought Morn Hyland back to Mallorys.

Neither of them gave anything away.

Captain's Fancy coasted into dock later the same day.

She also had been hurt, but Nick Succorso didn't seem to care.

He talked her past inspec- tion.

He laughed circles around a board of inquiry.

He and his crew also returned to Mallorys free and eager, ready to enjoy themselves.

The official search was still going on.

So far, no trace of the supply ship had been found.

After this much time, there was little chance that any trace would ever be found.

; But that night Station Security broke into Mallorys to arrest Angus.

They had evidence that a crime had been committed.

So they said.

That gave them the right to board Bright Beauty without permission and take STTZE!PPHAESN ER BOSOPNSACLEDESCOUN the ship's datacore.

The datacore enabled them to find her secret holds.

And in the secret holds were food, equipment, and medicine which could only have come.from the missing supply ship.

Arrests in DelSec were few.

The people who frequented places like Mallorys Bar & Sleep were prone to resent the intrusion of overt law and order into their lives.

Even in groups, Security couldn't always pass through DelSec without harassment.

But a supply ship had been robbed-presumably gutted.

Com-Mine Station needed those supplies to live.

DelSec needed those supplies.

Every man and woman in Mallorys would have suffered for this particular crime.

And every one of them disliked or feared or even hated Angus Thermopyle.

At first, the arrest didn't go smoothly.

Before Angus was taken, he and Morn Hyland began to scuffle: he was apparently trying to hold her back.

Nevertheless she managed to break away just as Security closed on him.

At once, the crowd opened for her, pried apart by Nick Succorso's crew.

And then she and Nick were gone; they disappeared as effectively as a blink crossing.

Captain's Fancy was allowed to slip out of dock unmolested; but that wasn't hard to explain.

Nick must have done a certain amount of bargaining with Security before he handed over his evidence against Angus.

Obviously, his right to leave was part of the bargain.

So the fair maiden was rescued.

The swashbuckling pirate bore her away with all her beauty.

For weeks, the sots and relics in Mallorys could hardly talk about anything except what the maiden and the pirate were doing with each other.

People who were accessible to romantic emotions contem- plated what had happened with a lump in their throats.

And even the cynics sitting in the corners were gratified by the outcome.

Nick Succorso had done exactly what they expected of him.

There were only two flaws in this story.

One was that the supply ship from Earth arrived on schedule.

It hadn't had any trouble along the way.

And it reported that there hadn't been any other ship.

The other was that the control to Morn Hyland's zone implant was never found.

Angus Thermopyle didn't have it on him when he was arrested.

That was why he was rotting in lockup instead of facing execution.

The first matter was easily explained.

Nick Succorso must have ar- ranged the whole thing-faked the distress call, stolen Station supplies him- self, planted them on Bright Beauty.

That was the kind of thing he did.

It made the people in Mallorys admire him even more.

The second issue was more disconcerting, however.

It didn't make TERESA Las tf O'R Y.

20, sense.

Angus could not have gotten rid of the control earlier: if he had done that, she would have been able to escape him-or, more likely, to butcher him with her bare hands for the things he had done to her.

And yet he must have gotten rid of it earlier.

Otherwise he would have been caught with it The only other explanation was less satisfying.

After all, the zone implant and its control were hypothetical, not proven.

Perhaps they had never existed.

But in that case the entire sequence of events degenerated into in- comprehensibility.

Why did she stay with him, if he had no power over her?

And if his power was of some other kind, why did he give it up?

What warned him that he was in danger?

No one knew the answers.

However, the people who asked them were only interested out of curiosity.

The main thrust of the action was clear enough.

Details that didn't make sense could eventually be forgotten.

The crowd at Mallorys would have found the real story much harder to live with.

STEPHEN R.

DONALDSON ra Bad eon aie feel sa 1 3 Fn here were parts of the story that would always remain obscure, unless Angus Thermopyle explained them; and he refused.

By the end of his trial, Bright Beauty didn't have any secrets left.

Despite her pretense of being a prospector's ship, she was indeed equipped with sophisticated particle sifters and doppler sensors, tools that no legitimate prospector would ever need.

She was too heavily shielded, too heavily armed.

Under boost, her thrust drive could have shifted the orbit of a planetoid.

She had cargo holds hidden in places the Station inspectors never imagined.

And she had so many relays and servos, compensations and overrides, that it was actually possible for one man to run her alone-although the experts who examined her agreed it would be suicide for any individual to take on that kind of complex strain for more than a few hours at a time.

In addition, the datacore revealed the extent of Angus' "wealth."

To the surprise of his prosecutors, his resources turned out to be trivial; almost nonexistent.

Regardless of his reputation, he was operating only a few steps ahead of his expenses.

That unexpected detail didn't help him, of course.

He hadn't been arrested for his "wealth."

And in other ways the exposure of his secrets was sufficiently damning.

Enough evidence was found to convict him of several acts of piracy-although everyone in Security agreed that the evidence was T-HEMR-EALSSTORY disappointing, since it wasn't adequate to procure the death penalty.

Cer- tainly it wasn't adequate to explain the more tantalizing aspects of Morn's story.

i Confronted with this inadequacy-which presumably gave him the opportunity to cast his actions in the most favorable possible light-Angus surprised his prosecutors further by refusing to defend himself, testify on his own behalf.

Indeed, he refused to answer any questions at all.

With a zone implant, of course, he could have been inspired to talk; but the law-and the UMCP-tefused to consider confession an "authorized use.""

Consequently, Com-Mine Security never found out where or how Bright Beauty had been outfitted, or how she'd been damaged.

No explanation was obtained for the fact that his reputation so far exceeded the evidence against him.

He was unwilling either to account for or to defend the presence of stolen Station food, equipment, and medicine aboard his ship.

And no new illumination was shed on his strange relationship with Morn Hyland.

In the first weeks of his incarceration, he opened his mouth only when he wanted to complain about the food or the facilities or the treatment in the Station lockup.

And when he was informed that Bright Beauty was being sent to the Station shipyard to be dismantled for spare parts.

Then he pounded on the walls of his cell and started to howl with such fury that eventually he had to be sedated.

No one knew what had warned him when the Hyland ship had come into Com-Mine Station-or how hard he had tried to get away from her.

Probably he would have been unable to explain that warning.

It was a matter of instinct.

He had good instincts, and they started to burn as he watched the sleek oreliner nudge its way into dock.

It looked like a prize, the kind of treasure ship Bright Beauty could peel apart weld by weld, exposing to theft or destruction the things that made other people think they were superior beings: the money, the posses- sions, the luck.

He had tackled ships like that in the past, had tackled them often, tracking them to their destinations, learning their secrets, then blast- ing them open in the black void, leaving them ruined, lost forever-had tackled them and raged to himself fiercely as he did so, destroying what other men would have captured as riches because his need for money had limits while his desire to see what matter cannon fire could do was immense.

Alone in his ship, or wandering around DelSec, or sitting in Mallorys-Angus Thermopyle was always alone, even when he happened to find.some stow- or castaway piece of human garbage to crew for him-he relived the ships he had tackled and hated them.

But not this time.

S T-E P_H EoNeR ) sDSOPNSAM sD SO N This time, his instincts burned-and he always trusted his instincts.

As far as he knew, he had no particular reason to be wary.

His crimes left little evidence behind; there was no better place than deep space to hide the remains of his plundering.

Only his datacore could damage him, and he had long ago taken steps to alleviate that danger-steps which no one would detect because they were theoretically impossible.

But because he was a hunter, he had also been hunted.

He had the intuitions of prey.

So he did something that would never have occurred to anyone else on or around Com-Mine Station: he turned his field-mining probes toward the Hyland ship.

One of those probes was designed to measure the nuclear weight of thin cross sections of solid rock.

It informed him that Starmaster's hull was formed of an alloy he'd only heard about, never seen-an alloy so heavy it could shed matter cannon fire the way steel shed water.

An alloy so expensive no oreliner could afford it.

There were no haul- ers or handlers in space rich enough to afford it.

When he saw the readings, Angus Thermopyle fled.

He didn't take the time to buy supplies.

He didn't try to find out what the station scuttlebutt concerning the Hyland ship was.

He didn't even bother to repaint Bright Beauty's name-something he always did before risking the malign vagaries of space.

A ship as rich as Starmaster would have friends, muscle.

Escorts?

Fighters hanging off station to watch for trouble?

He took that into account, but it didn't stop him.

Sealing his hatches, he called up Station Center, filed a purely fictitious destination report, and received formal permission to undock.

Then, because his instincts were still on fire, he meticulously followed the departure trajectory he was assigned.

Cursing like a slavey all the way, he left Com-Mine along a route that would attract as little attention as possible.

And he didn't risk cutting in boost and shifting his course toward the belt until he was absolutely alone at least fifty thousand kilometers past the known range of any scan from the vicinity of Station.

He was hoping that the belt was far enough away to hide him.

The Station had been built at a considerable distance to avoid the meteor storms and other debris which always accompanied asteroid belts through space, the residue of planets that time and gravity had reduced to rubble.

By the time he changed course, the exertion of manning the whole ship himself had begun to make his hands shake and his eyes fill with sweat.

He had too many instruments to read, too many systems to monitor, too much data to absorb.

And his computer couldn't help him.

It had extrava- gant fail-safes: the very mechanisms which enabled him to run Bright Beauty TIHEARSEA LoS Or Y alone would shut the ship down in alarm if he gave the computer control of them.

Nevertheless he kept going.

His instincts had warned him, and he always obeyed them.

Angus Thermopyle was a pirate and a mine jumper.

He hated every- body, and there was enough old blood on his hands to convict a whole prison full of illegals.

He was alone now because the decrepit drunk he'd hired to crew for him had made the mistake of asking the wrong question at the wrong time; so he'd flattened the man's head with a spanner and left the body in one of the thruster tubes to be ashed the next time the drive was engaged.

He may not have been rich, but he was probably everything else the people in Mallorys believed him to be.

He was also a coward.

So he ran from the Hyland ship under as much g as his body could stand and remain conscious.

The muscles of his shoulders began to twitch, and he couldn't keep the sweat out of his eyes; but he kept running.

When he knew that he had pushed himself too far, he didn't stop: instead, he started pumping drugs into his veins, stim to keep him awake, cat to keep him steady.

He was afraid, and he ran.

Before he was close enough to the belt to begin deceleration, he had been driving under heavy g for half a standard day.

Now the drugs were  giving him psychotic episodes with increasing regularity, and he no longer knew clearly what he was doing.

However, he was familiar with those drugs; before starting them, he'd understood what they would do to him.

So he'd taken the precaution of locking Bright Beauty's course.

When he was finally forced to surrender control of his ship's systems to her command computer, the course-lock and her fail-safes managed the hard braking for him.

As a result, he arrived without crashing-and without pulling his ship away into madness-at a part of the belt which everyone knew had been mined out years ago; a long stretch of sailing rock where other ships were unlikely to come.

There he picked a particularly dead asteroid, parked Bright Beauty in a mining crater, shut down everything except life-support, and went to sleep in his g-seat, catted out of his mind.

If the Hyland ship could find him there, then he was lost anyway.

He had never really had a chance to escape.

He still had no reason to believe the people on that ship even knew he existed.

Hours later, he awoke screaming because there were skinworms all over him, crawling, gnawing, starting to burrow in- SPE 'PH SeSN SRe ADSGENSASLED 3S "Oin The sensation was terrible.

It was also normal; a predictable conse- quence of the drugs.

However, for him so much of what was terrible was also familiar that he knew exactly what to do.

Although he couldn't swallow the bright terror rising in his throat or unknot the red pain closing around his heart, his hands were almost steady as he injected more drugs into his veins- analgesics to flush the now-poisonous stimulants and cataleptics away, anti- histamines and steroids to soften his body's reactions.

As soon as these new drugs took hold, he slept again.

The next time he awakened, he had trouble breathing because the air in Bright Beauty was going bad.

He'd left Com-Mine Station without sup- plies.

That meant he now had only a little water, less food-and no clean pads for the scrubbers which were supposed to keep his air breathable.

Checking the computer's maintenance log, he confirmed that his present pads were long overdue for a change.

This development made him rage as if he were on the verge of a breakdown.

But that, too, was normal.

He still knew exactly what to do.

Risking anoxia because he didn't have the strength to put on an EVA suit, he shut down circulation and took the pads out of the scrubbers.

While his head throbbed with CO, overload and his vision blurred in and out of focus, he used half his water to make a chemical bath for the pads.

He left the pads in the bath as long as he could-until he was close to unconsciousness.

Then he refitted them in the scrubbers and restarted the circulation.

Unfortunately, his problems were just beginning.

He was probably safe where he was; but he couldn't stay there.

His food would last for only two or three more days.

He could reuse all his water -but only if he had his purifiers serviced.

And the superficial cleaning he'd given the pads might not hold up even that long.

He had only two choices.

Return to Com-Mine Station.

Or find some other source of supply.

He never considered returning to the Station.

He wasn't deterred by the prospect of humiliation.

If anyone ever found out that he'd panicked and run, only to return limping because he'd run out of food, water, and air, he would be sneered at everywhere in DelSec; but he could live with that.

The world had been sneering at him from the first.

He took revenge when he got the chance.

However, there was still the Hyland ship- That ship was to blame, of course.

She'd scared him, and he hated everything that scared him.

As he lifted Bright Beauty out of the mining crater and eased back from the belt to give his scanning equipment range, he began to plot ways to make Starmaster pay for what was happening to him.

Ways to wreck a ship with that hull?

The bare concept was nonsense HAE AARGEA LS TO RY -and Angus Thermopyle wasn't prone to nonsense.

Nevertheless thinking about it helped him do what he had to.

In a state of cold rage which served as calm, he spent the next two days searching the belt with his sniffers and sifters, prospecting not for ore but for miners.

| Toward the end of that time, he came close to panic again.

The pads were starting to give out; his brain was being squeezed in a vise of bad air.

His tongue was thick from drinking bad water, and he was urgently hungry.

Still his cold, black rage kept him going.

And a judicious application of drugs kept him steady.

At last he found what he needed-a mine on a craggy and pock- marked asteroid with a look of depletion about it, as if it had already had all its riches cut out.

Yet the people working there had a ship.

It stood on its struts a short distance from their camp, which was in turn a short distance from the hole they'd cut into the asteroid.

The ship was cold: it had been shut down a considerable time ago, when the miners had settled in to work this hunk of rock.

Under other circumstances, Angus Thermopyle would have ignored those miners.

He could tell their whole story with a glance at their ship, their camp, and his field-mining probes.

This asteroid had once been rich, but it had in fact already been mined; played out.

The people on it now-probably a family, people who had to spend long periods of time on ships or in mines tended to do things by families-were essentially scavengers.

Too timid or defeated or poor to go prospecting for an original strike, they sweated their bare survival out of the rock by gleaning what little had been missed by previous miners.

A pirate or jumper wouldn't waste his time on them.

On the other hand, they had food and fresh water and scrubber pads.

Angus was having trouble keeping his anger and distress from choking him, and he didn't hesitate.

He went in hard.

The miners saw him coming.

His board picked up shouts of warning and protest, appeal and outrage: he ignored them.

As he approached, he used torpedoes to collapse the mouth of the mine, blocking it with dead rock.

Then he set Bright Beauty straight down on the camp so that his braking blast incinerated the habitation domes, charred the suited figures outside.

The radio shouts died in a gabble of static.

Got you, you bastards.

The camp had been large enough to support perhaps twenty people.

With luck, he'd killed them all.

He didn't want any witnesses.

A quick scan for life readings, distress calls, suit-to-suit communica- tions.

None.

Good.

That left him with a clear path to the other ship.

As soon as he put on a suit himself, he could go over there and get everything he S T-E P' At & Ne&k: 2 ADSOR NEARED) S OPN needed.

Then he would be able to hide out in the belt as long as necessary.

Until he got a chance to repay some of his fear.

He was on his way to the EVA locker when Bright Beauty's Klaxons went off like several dozen screams of pain.

The asteroid's tiny gravity didn't hold him back: with a powerful kick, he sent himself diving for the command module.

One hand caught the back of his g-seat; the other slapped instructions at the computer, demanding an explanation.

He was already in the seat, strapped down, and keying thrust for takeoff by the time the computer told him what was going on.

His sifters and sniffers and sensors had detected the approach of another ship.

And not just any other ship: a ship the same size and configura- tion as Starmaster.

In fact, it was Starmaster.

His probes weren't likely to be mistaken about that alloy.

He'd programmed the computer to watch for her.

And to make enough noise to wake him from his grave if it spotted her.

She was coming at him fast.

How the fucking hell did she get here?

How did she find me?

No time for that.

Coming fast.

But not fast enough to catch him.

Bright Beauty was bound to be more agile than any oreliner, no matter how much cash that bitch cost.

And this was the belt, where agility was worth more than matter cannon fire.

He was terrified-but he also knew what he could do.

What his ship could do.

Let that fornicating hunk of money try to chase him and see what happened.

The only problem was that he didn't have enough food.

Or water.

Or air.

No time for that either.

Survival was the highest priority Angus Thermopyle understood: it took precedence over everything.

And he was sure from the core of his bloated belly to the sweat rolling down his jowls that the Hyland ship didn't intend him to survive.

As if he really were calm, he hit thrust and began lift-off.

At the same time, he primed his cannon, diverting precious boost to build up charge.

And he made sure his communications board was clear, set to receive everything and transmit nothing.

Starmaster was still a considerable distance away, but her first trans- mission reached him before he was a hundred meters off the asteroid.

"Set down."

The voice sounded crisp and commanding above the hull-roar of thrust.

"Bright Beauty, you are ordered to set down."

Despite the intensity of his concentration on his instruments and controls, Angus was able to mutter a few obscenities under his breath.

"Angus Thermopyle, you are ordered to set down."

The voice was sure of itself.

"This is Captain Davies Hyland, commanding officer, United TAPE RCECA LAS 1.0 RY, Mining Companies Police destroyer Starmaster.

You have committed mur- der.

If you do not set down to be boarded, you will be fired upon."

UMCP.

That got his attention.

For a second, he actually stopped swearing and took his hands off his console.

The cops.

It made sense; so much sense that he should have figured it out earlier.

Who else was there - anywhere who could pool enough money to hull an entire ship with that alloy?

Who else thought they owned the fucking universe?

No one.

Only the United Mining Companies-and their private cops, the muscle which en- forced or invented the law that kept Earth and its huge appetites fed.

And this was why they were here: to hunt the pirates and jumpers and scavengers who fed off all the mining operations in vast space.

In just a few seconds, they would be close enough to ash him.

"Message repeats,"

the radio announced, stupidly unafraid.

"Angus Thermopyle, you are ordered to set down.

This is Captain Davies Hyland, commanding officer, United Mining-"

"No,"

Angus coughed in desperation.

With one heavy finger he stabbed at his console, cut off reception.

At once, the noise of his thrusters through the hull seemed to get louder, more frantic.

"I don't care if you come from fucking God.

You can't have my ship."

Holding his breath against the stress, he wrenched Bright Beauty around scarcely two hundred meters off the asteroid and slammed on full boost, piling up more g than he ought to be able to stand in order to put the asteroid between him and Starmaster.

Then he drove away toward the heart of the belt.

He didn't cut thrust, reduce acceleration, until the simple weight of his body under so much g pushed him to the edge of blackout.

Klaxons howled at him, proximity sensors squalling with overload.

Light-headed in physical relief as g eased-relief that didn't touch his essen- tial terror-Angus skimmed past a small meteor, then deflected Bright Beauty between two larger rocks.

At the same time, he rigged his ship for battle.

Under normal operating conditions, she required two people to run her.

In combat situations, she could have used six.

But Angus Thermopyle handled everything himself.

He made no effort to turn his cannon on the UMCP ship.

Instead, as fast as his targeting computer could track, he started blazing away at every meteor and asteroid in range, filling the space behind him with chunks of all sizes caroming in all directions; covering his tail with debris.

He wasn't trying to lure Starmaster into a crash; not yet: she was still too far away to be threatened by a little rubble.

But she was closing fast-and a destroyer as STAET REA NoeRe EDZORNPALLEDSSCOIN 3] expensive as she was probably had artillery which would make his cannon look like popguns.

He was doing his best to confuse her targ.

It worked for a while.

Out of the black, light came in bright flares, matter fire hitting rock; the rock went incandescent as it burst into its com- ponent particles; static sizzled across Bright Beauty's scan; light collapsed to black again.

Angus rode a meson torrent deeper into the belt and snatched his ship past obstacles that could have crushed her, and went on firing him- self, madly throwing up scree like a screen against Starmaster's guns.

But the destroyer learned fast.

She turned his own tactics against him.

There was a lull in the fire-fifteen seconds, twenty, twenty-five-during which no attempt was made to hit him.

Then a dead stone lump the size of a small space station hardly a thousand kilometers ahead took a shaft of incan- descence through its center and broke apart so violently that chunks as big as ejection pods came at him like thunderbolts.

His proximity alarms went wild, then dead as their circuits over- loaded.

In the sudden silence, Angus ducked, squirmed, twisted-and almost made it.

Bright Beauty was agile, and he was desperate.

At the last instant, however, one rock slapped her in the side and sent her tumbling like a derelict through the belt.

The next collision was gentler, just a kiss that flattened out some of the gyration.

He didn't feel it.

G and anoxia had stretched him too thin.

He was unconscious.

As far as he knew, he was still trying to scream.

Deca S 1 OCR Y a eS Sther CUI Ae ale eoas A SN TFN N ; oments later, he came back to himself.

Just in time: Bright Beauty was plung- ing toward the kind of collision that would crumple her like an empty can.

Hardly aware yet of what he was doing, reacting by plain instinct and fear, he punched at his console, fought the spin, got his thrusters aimed for braking.

Only a few hundred meters off an asteroid almost large enough for coloniza- tion, he wrestled his ship under control.

Running on automatic pilot himself, still gasping for air and barely able to focus his eyes, he checked for damage.

Bright Beauty had a cabin-size dent in her side; but her shields held, interior bulkheads held, preserving a fragile integrity.

One part of her nose looked like it'd been hit by an impact- ram, and a number of sensors and sniffers were dead; but no structural harm had been done.

She would still function.

She could go someplace and get help-at the moment, he had no idea where, his brain was too fuzzy from oxygen starvation, but someplace, it was still possible, she could do it some- how.

Entirely by accident, one of the cameras which had been scanning Bright Beauty's hull gave him a glimpse of the UMCP ship.

She was coming for him, coming fast.

She had a straight shot at him.

As soon as she fired, his whole life would be reduced to light and electrons.

T MeEY RECA LS TOR Y And there was nothing he could do about it.

He couldn't even play dead.

That wouldn't fool her.

She'd seen him brake: she knew he was alive.

The thought turned his guts to water.

He didn't want to die.

Almost without realizing it, he hit his distress beacon.

Don't shoot, don't shoot, you fornicating filthy bastards, don't kill me, I surrender.

Starmaster came ahead as if she wanted to eviscerate him at point- blank range; as if Captain Davies Hyland wanted to see Angus Thermopyle die with his own eyes.

The terrible injustice of it made Angus burn to shoot first, to key targ and at least go out fighting, even though matter cannon fire couldn't hurt the UMCP ship.

But he didn't do that.

Fear was more imperative than hate.

Raging like a maniac, he fed his transmitter all the gain it could handle and sent his distress call into the dark like a wail.

His cameras gave him a perfect view as Starmaster altered course, turned in the direction of the asteroid-and broke in half.

Broke in half.

A blast like that: one of the drives must have blown up.

Fire and metal sprayed without a sound into the belt.

Out of the center of the explo- sion, Starmaster toppled as if she were falling toward the surface of the asteroid.

Angus watched in complete astonishment as the ship crashed and died.

Instead of gutting Starmaster, the fire went out almost immediately.

That implied- He was too stupefied to realize what it implied.

On auto- matic again, his hands fumbled across the console, activating short-range scanners, focusing cameras.

He was trying to think.

He should already be dead, fried in his g-seat.

The UMCP ship had a straight shot at him.

But he was still alive.

Starmaster broke in half.

The fire went out almost immedi- ately.

That implied- Oxygen.

The fire went out because it didn't get oxygen.

But the ship was full of air.

Angus understood fires in space: he knew Starmaster should have burned longer than that.

Some of her interior bulkheads must be holding.

Parts of her retained structural integrity.

That, too, had significant implications.

They eluded him, however.

Bad air and the fundamental shock of his survival muddled his head.

Ideas that should have been clear to him refused to come into focus.

Then he got it.

S T>E P HUE N @RoADgO) NSABLID S-OIN If parts of Starmaster retained integrity, then some of her people might have been protected or shielded.

There might be survivors.

} There were survivors.

When he pulled his eyes down from the screen where his cameras reported what they could see, down to his scan displays and readouts, he discovered that his instruments registered life.

Three or four people were still alive.

No, not three.

Definitely four.

Still stunned by what had happened, and hardly able to breathe be- cause Bright Beauty's atmosphere had deteriorated considerably during the past few minutes, Angus struggled to think.

He never considered trying to rescue the survivors.

Even with all his wits about him, he would have dismissed that idea.

Those people were cops; his enemies.

And he didn't bother to wonder what' had happened, how Starmaster had died.

He would probably never know the answer to that question.

He would probably never care.

His thoughts were more basic: Air.

Water.

Food.

And he thought, Bastards!

If he went down there, one of the survivors might shoot him.

He would have to wait here until they were dead.

But he didn't know how badly they were hurt.

If they were hurt at all.

They might be able to outlast him.

Without adequate air or water or food, he might collapse long before they did.

Caught between need and cowardice, he was paralyzed.

Sucking sweat off his upper lip, he stared at Starmaster's image on his screen and wrestled with his fear.

Then he thought about what had been done to him.

His heart began to swell with old rage, familiar and malign.

The strength which had kept him alive so long, against such odds, came back to him.

Snarling curses as fiercely as he could with the little oxygen the rank atmosphere provided, he shifted Bright Beauty into landing attitude and started her moving.

While he was still negotiating a touchdown, scan informed him that one set of life-signs had stopped.

Good.

Only three left.

Gently he set Bright Beauty on her struts beside the UMCP ship.

Leaving his g-seat, he bobbed like a balloon against the asteroid's gravity toward her lockers.

Once he'd donned his EVA suit and clamped the faceplate shut, he spent a minute simply breathing the sweet air from the tanks.

But he TiIMMEARIEIA LAST O'R  couldn't afford to delay.

The remaining survivors might be aware of him.

| They might be trying to train Starmaster's guns on him right now.

He took an impact rifle with him, a miner's weapon because it could clear rockfalls and powder stone; in a pinch it could be used to buckle steel plate.

He was no longer swearing: he was too scared to swear.

The UMCP ship terrified him.

The survivors terrified him.

And EVA always terrified him.

But he thought about air and revenge, and went to get them.

Cycling through the airlocks, he eased himself onto the surface of the asteroid.

Out here, the only light was the distant glitter of the starfield.

With- out the enhanced sensitivity of his cameras to help him, he could only see Starmaster as a silhouette, blacker than space.

She looked huge and treacher- ous, riddled with secrets.

Playing a beam along her sides helped put her in perspective; but that small light couldn't muffle the way his air tanks hissed in his ears, sounding so loud against the impenetrable silence of the belt that it seemed to mark him like a beacon for all his enemies.

He loathed EVA because the sound of his own breathing made him feel puny and vulnerable.

Now air and food and water didn't matter to him anymore.

He thought he could live without them somehow.

It was only rage that kept him going.

Bright Beauty had been hurt.

She would never be the same again.

Starmaster's survivors were going to pay for that.

The people who had sent her out against him were going to pay.

Sweating hate, he crossed to the UMCP ship.

Without much trouble, he found an airlock in the intact part of the ship.

As soon as he'd entered the lock and closed it behind him, he began to recover.

The ship's air pumping into the lock muted the hiss of his tanks.

Her survivors might be waiting to ambush him as soon as he came out of the lock -but now at least he was no longer outside, exposed.

And inside his rifle would be a devastating weapon.

As the lock cycled open, he ducked to the side, pressed himself against the wall: an instinctive precaution.

His instincts were good.

A man stood waiting for him.

At first glance, the man looked all right.

His silver hair was rumpled, but that only increased his appearance of eagle authority.

Captain's bars marked the shoulders of his tunic.

In one fist he held a beam gun.

Angus nearly cried out, "Don't shoot!"

even though his suit's trans- mitter was switched off and his voice would have been inaudjble.

"I'm Captain Davies Hyland,"

the man said.

"Angus Thermopyle, you're under arrest."

Through the suit's receiver, his confidence sounded insane, detached from reality.

"We're going to commandeer your ship."

SIE P HE NERS ADZO) NGAMLID SOIN His eyes hadn't reacted to Angus' movement.

He wasn't looking at Angus now.

His gun was aimed at the back of the lock.

The parbroiled skin around his eyes betrayed what had happened to im.

Flash-blinded in the crash.

In spite of that, he was trying to bluff- Commandeer my ship?

My SHIP?

Cackling hideously behind his faceplate, Angus fired.

The impact rifle spattered a fine spray of blood thirty meters down the corridor.

_ Then he hastened to apologize.

I'm sorry, Captain Davies Hyland, he said in gleeful courtesy.

You can't have my ship.

There were a few pieces of the captain's body left on the floor.

Angus kicked them out of his way and went looking for the other two survivors.

He was starting to feel much better.

The bridge was in this part of Starmaster.

He went there first-- carefully, surveying each corner and passage with his rifle before he risked it, because he had no way to find those two people except by hunting them down.

His caution was wasted, however: he didn't see anyone until he reached the bridge.

And there the man hunched over the helm console was in no condition to threaten anyone.

He was dying where he sat-internal bleeding, Angus guessed.

Nothing to worry about.

Angus pushed the man out of his g-seat.

New pain made the man cry out; but it also brought his eyes into focus, which was what Angus wanted.

Laughing inside his suit, he blasted the man to pulp and splinters, a splash and smear of blood on the floor.

One more to go.

Then air filters.

Food lockers.

A line to the water tanks.

And everything else worth taking.

The ship's datacore would have been worth taking, of course.

But one look at the bridge computer told him the datacore had already been destructed.

Staunch Captain Davies Hyland had probably taken care of that automatically, while his ship was still falling toward the asteroid.

So that his precious codes and contacts and orders and even specs wouldn't survive to be used against his masters.

Fuck Captain Davies Hyland, Angus thought.

Fuck him everywhere.

He's got enough holes in him for that.

Cheered by this observation, Angus pushed a body out of his way and sat down at the scan station.

The secondary systems which ran the locks were still operating; that implied parts of the ship still had a bit of juice.

This console was one of them.

Refocusing short-range scan inward, he used it to locate the last survivor.

TIHFERIEA LYS TO RY.

40, There: in a room the scan computer identified as the auxiliary bridge.

- That made him snarl under his breath.

From the auxiliary bridge, it might still be possible to fire on Bright Beauty.

Hurrying now because he knew where his prey was and didn't need caution, he went to finish off the last of Starmaster's crew.

Under the circumstances, his concern for his ship was greater than his desire to inflict pain.

He broke into the auxiliary bridge fast with his rifle ready, intending to shoot first and think later.

Morn Hyland stopped him without lifting a finger; without threaten- ing Bright Beauty; without so much as reacting to his entrance.

Instead, she stared through him with stark, blank horror on her face, as if she could see something so ghastly that it blinded her, making him invisible to her.

In the first few minutes, he didn't even notice his own surprise at finding a woman when he was expecting a man.

Although he knew there was no one else alive on the ship, her fixed stare had the power to turn him around in an effort to see what had appalled her.

Nothing.

Of course.

She was the only one here.

There weren't even any bodies.

She'd come through the explosion and the crash without having to watch any of her crewmates die.

Something like a worm of suspicion crawled through Angus Thermopyle's belly.

He tightened his grip on his rifle as he confronted her again.

Apparently she still couldn't see him.

Her eyes remained nailed to her personal horror, ignoring his movements as if he were too insubstantial to impinge on her vision.

She was in shock.

If he didn't do anything to help her, she might stay that way for hours.

Until something inside her started to heal.

Or until she slipped over into madness.

He had no intention whatsoever of helping her.

But then she spoke.

In a sore whisper, as if her voice were worn out from screaming, she said, "Let me die."

Inside his suit, Angus had begun to sweat again.

"T don't want help.

Let me die.

Go away."

He stared at her, studied her.

He didn't know it, but his expression resembled hers.

Despite its distress, her face had lines that reminded him of Captain Davies Hyland.

And the badge on her shipsuit said "Ensign M.

Hyland."

The captain's daughter?

That was quite possible.

Ships were often crewed by families.

Especially in organizations like the UMCP.

Where loy- alty was the only thing more important than power and order, muscle and S J-E POW EN eRe #DZORNSARL SD yS-OON ] _ stability, the two essentials of civilization and money.

But she looked too - young to be a veteran.

Her first mission?

"Go away."

What did she see that made her want to die?

Abruptly he keyed his suit's mike.

"Why?"

Through the speaker, his voice was harsh, like the demanding metal noise of ships in collision.

"What did you do to them?"

Without warning, she gripped the sides of her head and began to wail; a thin, weak keening.

"Stop that,"

he barked.

"Tell me what you did to them.

If you don't, I'll be glad to beat it out of you."

Her wail cracked, hurt her throat, and scaled higher.

"Shut up!"

He brandished his rifle.

""They're all dead.

Nobody can hear you.

I shot your father myself.

Shut up."

That made her look at him.

Some kind of recognition ate into her like ~ acid.

For part of a second, she gave him a flare of straight, absolute anguish.

"He survived?

He was alive?"

Angus nodded.

"Until I blew him apart."

During the space between one heartbeat and the next, she seemed to collapse inward like the core of a fusion reactor, compressing herself for an explosion.

Then she flung herself out of her g-seat, clawing at his faceplate.

With her bare hands, she ripped and beat at him, trying to reach him through the suit.

Her wail became a screech, as wild as the cry of a mad thing.

At that moment, for no clear or even conscious reason, he took his first step away from himself, his first step along the course which led to his teal doom.

He didn't pity her.

He didn't pity anybody: any man or woman weak enough to be pitied was weak enough to be taken advantage of.

He wasn't ashamed of having killed her father.

Captain Davies fornicating Hyland had damaged Bright Beauty; he deserved worse than he got.

And Angus Thermopyle certainly had no intention of rescuing the captain's daughter.

What use could he possibly get out of a madwoman?

Never mind the fact that she was UMCP, muscle for all the worlds which had ever despised him, in addition to being a witness to what he had done to that mining camp-a danger to him as long as she lived.

And yet he didn't shoot her.

Maybe he was simply tired of being alone.

Maybe on some level he'd begun to notice that behind her fierce distress she was obviously a woman.

Maybe his desire to know what had happened to Starmaster was stronger T .HPEVIRCESA LS ThO RY than he realized.

Or maybe she presented possibilities of revenge which he hadn't yet had a chance to appreciate.

Whatever the reason, when she attacked him he actually dropped his rifle.

For a moment, he grappled with her, fought to pin her arms.

But she was too crazy and frantic for that; so he drew back one heavy fist and clubbed her to the floor.

She whimpered, twisted, tried to squirm away from the pain-and then lay still, breathing in a graceless rasp like the sound of his own respira- tion inside his suit.

Hitting her-that kind of violence-was so seductive that he wanted to do it again.

He wanted to give her ribs a kick and see what would happen.

He restrained himself, however.

Unexpectedly, he found he had one too many things to worry about.

Filters.

Supplies.

Loot.

And her.

And there was always the chance that some other ship was near enough to respond to the distress call he had sent out.

Starmaster herself may have sent out a distress call.

If he were caught here, with a broken UMCP ship to explain, and dead miners not very far away- Better to forget about her.

Forget about looting the ship.

Take all the filters and supplies he could get, and leave fast.

Suddenly he was profoundly tired.

His suit still had plenty of fresh air; but he'd been hungry and thirsty for several days, and Starmaster had nearly killed him.

Muttering obscenities at Morn Hyland, hating her because it was all her fault, because she was the only one left of the ship and crew that had made him panic and run as if he were a coward, he slung her over his shoulders and went looking for an EVA locker.

| Ominous and slow, like a capped volcano, he suited her, checked her tanks, and carried her against the asteroid's small gravity back to Bright Beauty.

There he took her into the cubicle of his sickbay.

Roughly he strapped her down, so that she couldn't move, and left her, still in her suit because Bright Beauty's air was so foul.

Let her come to consciousness alone and not know where she was and be terrified: she deserved it.

After pausing to find out what his sniffers and sensors could tell him, he returned to the UMCP ship.

Forcing himself to work long past the point where he wanted to lie down in exhaustion, Angus retrieved his rifle and then set about taking every- thing that could conceivably be of any value out of Starmaster, Enough filters to keep his air clean for years.

Food stores of a much higher quality than he would have been willing to pay for.

Expensive liquor.

Clothes.

Spare parts.

Medicines.

And guns.

And tools.

Finally he ran a line which allowed him to S TRE:-POR EYN R.2 ADSORNFAEL SD 'SCOIN pump water across to his ship.

When he was done, Bright Beauty was better supplied than she'd been since the day when he'd first stolen her.

He was wild for rest; but even then he didn't stop.

Morn Hyland was awake now.

Stripping off his suit, he climbed into his g-seat and turned a receiver to her transmitter so that he could listen to her fear.

That kept him going while he lifted off the asteroid and went hunting with glazed eyes and unsteady hands for a place to hide.

He took the first place he found.

By then, Morn's voice was stretched and frayed, barely audible; she sounded like she'd lost her mind.

He made sure her straps were still secure, shot her full of cat so she wouldn't disturb him.

Then he climbed into his bunk and collapsed.

Teh beek eAgto snl O R:Y a - FIn WE he woke up, the air in Bright Beauty was so fresh that he could smell himself stink.

Too much work.

Too much sweat.

Too many days in the same shipsuit.

Angus Thermopyle wasn't particularly interested in personal cleanli- ness, but occasionally he felt good enough to take a shower.

For some reason, he felt good now.

He felt a sense of anticipation.

Munching some of Starmaster's rations, he checked his scan and the computer log to verify that there were no ships anywhere near his hiding place.

Then he went to the sickbay to look at Morn Hyland.

She was awake too; the cat had run out of her.

When he took off her faceplate, she made a small whimpering noise.

"Please."

She could hardlv force her throat to produce words.

"What are you doing?

What are you going to do to me?"

He smiled, waved the food bar he was eating, and moved away.

Nearly humming, he stripped, entered the san cubicle, and sprayed himself clean.

Because he was clean-and wearing a fresh shipsuit-when he re- turned to the sickbay, he was able to tell that Morn herself stank.

She'd fouled her suit.

Fouled it rather dramatically.

Her eyes were raw and dark, full of fear; but he could see in her face that she was still capable of self-disgust.

"You stink,"

he announced happily.

THEAREA LST ORY 'His tone made her flinch.

Apparently the desire to die had been - scared out of her.

He looked at her features closely.

Just to see what she would do, he ran the tips of his fingers along her cheek.

She closed her eyes as if she were fighting a need to vomit.

Grinning, he stepped back.

"You hungry?"

She opened her eyes and stared dismay at him.

"Want to get up and move around?"

No answer except dismay.

"Want to get clean?"

That reached her.

A tiny hope twisted her mouth, and her eyes filled with tears.

"Good."

He folded his arms, rested them on his belly.

He was going to enjoy this.

"Tell me what you did to them."

She surprised him.

Something that looked like anger shone out through her tears; the muscles of her jaw knotted.

In a voice so cracked and worn he could hardly hear it, she said, "You bastard.

If you're going to kill me, do it.

Don't make me lie here like this."

He wanted to hit her.

That also would have been enjoyable.

But he refrained because he wasn't ready to go that far yet.

She was still wearing a suit.

Grinning again, he leaned closer to her and rasped, "You're right.

I'm a bastard.

The worst bastard you'll ever meet.

And I'm going to let you lie there and stink until you tell me what you did to them.

You had your guns all lined up.

You were going to blast me apart.

Then you crashed.

"T want to know why.

What did you do?"

The memory hurt her.

He was glad to see that.

She turned her head as far away as she could inside the EVA suit.

Tears dripped past her nose.

Angus sucked his upper lip for a moment, then asked, "What's your name?"

She still didn't speak.

Probably trying to be tough.

Or maybe she assumed he already knew the answer.

After all, he must have seen the badge on her shipsuit.

Roughly he reached one hand to her neck and jerked up her id tag.

His computer could have read her entire official file from that tag, but all he wanted was the name.

"Morn Hyland.

Captain Davies motherfucking Hyland was your fa- ther.

That right?"

Now she was crying with her mouth as well as her eyes.

"I shot him.

But he was dead anyway."

Angus bent over her, whis- S TE: P A BN SR 2D AD ROANBAR DIS ON Ag pered in her ear.

"His ship crashed.

He was going to die no matter what happened.

I didn't cause that.

I didn't have anything to do with it.

It was your doing.

"What did you do to them?"

And she still didn't speak.

For the second time, he wanted to hit her.

But that could wait.

Instead he did something out of character.

Without realizing it-entirely without realizing it-he took another small step along the course of his doom.

He tried to explain himself.

Almost softly, he said, "You know who I am.

What I've got to lose.

You know I can't afford to let you loose until I know what I'm up against.

I can't do anything for you until I know what kind of danger you represent."

Almost gently, he returned her tag, then put a hand on her chin and turned her face toward him.

The stark horror was back in her eyes.

Her whisper was faraway and forlorn, lost in darkness.

"I initiated self-destruct.

From the auxiliary bridge."

His fingers clamped onto her jaw as if he could force her to tell the truth.

He thrust his face close to hers.

"You did what?"

"We were chasing you."

Her gaze didn't react to his proximity: the things that appalled her were so bright she couldn't register anything else.

"Dodging asteroids.

G was awful.

I thought we were going to break up.

I was at my station.

Auxiliary bridge.

I thought the straps on my seat were going to tear.

Or I was going to rupture.

"Then it stopped.

"TI could see you on the screens.

But I didn't care.

You destroyed that mining camp.

I'd already seen you kill all those miners.

I didn't care.

I should have cared, but I didn't.

The whole inside of my head was different.

"I was floating, and everything was clear.

Like a vision.

It was like the universe spoke to me.

I got the message, the truth."

Her stare remained fixed; but now she had to fight to keep her sobs down.

"The truth.

"I knew exactly what to do.

What I had to do.

I didn't question it.

"I keyed the self-destruct sequence into the computer.

That was sup- posed to blow up both drives.

We would have been turned to powder."

"You aren't an officer,"

Angus objected.

"You're practically a kid.

How did you know the self-destruct codes?"

"We all knew the codes.

Any one of us could do it.

So Starmaster wouldn't be captured.

That was our first priority.

Not be captured.

Under any circumstances.

If forbidden space got us-a ship like that- We can all be trusted.

We're all reliable.

Most of us are family.

They wouldn't let any- body who wasn't reliable on a ship like that.

T HEARSEA LaST ORY "But fa-Captain Hyland caught what I was doing.

He tried to abort.

Only the thrusters exploded.

I could hear him yelling at me over the inter- com-yelling at me because I was his daughter and I was destroying his ship, I was destroying him.

His sister and brothers.

My cousins.

Destroying them.

"And then it wasn't clear anymore.

There wasn't any vision.

We weren't in any danger.

It was all a lie.

I killed my whole family for no reason."

Fighting to contain her grief, she did her desperate best to shout, "Get me out of this suit!"

He ignored the demand.

"Stop whining.

Let me think."

Suddenly he was sure.

of his suspicions.

He'd taken a maniac aboard Bright Beauty, a human time bomb.

And yet it didn't make sense.

"How many times have you crossed the gap?"

"Twice,"

she answered, cowed not by his irritation but by her own despair.

"Twice,"

he echoed viciously.

"Of course.

Cops like you have to be deep-space certified.

So they test you in the Academy.

To weed out the crazies who get gap-sickness.

And then you had to reach Com-Mine Station.

You've only crossed the gap twice because this is your first deep-space assign- ment.

It doesn't make sense."

But while he was still speaking, he guessed the truth.

Gap-sickness came in every conceivable shape and disguise.

He had heard of people who crossed the gap once-or even several times-and then lived perfectly nor- mal lives until the right stimuli came along, until the right combination of circumstances occurred to trigger their personal vulnerability, their peculiar flaw.

Combat?

G-stress?

"How many times'-he took hold of her face again, forced her gaze toward him-"have you been under heavy g since the first time you crossed the gap?"

She gaped at him, anguish changing into comprehension in her eyes.

"Answer me.

You did all kinds of g work in the Academy.

They trained you for everything they could think of.

Did you do that before or after your first gap crossing?

When was the last time you were under heavy gr"

"Before,"

she husked weakly.

Her voice seemed to stick in her teeth.

"The gap comes last.

Only if you want to crew in deep space.

Earth can't afford to risk people who want to work in-system.

Can't risk wasting all that training and expense for people who aren't going to be in any danger."

She must have understood what he was getting at, because she con- STREP AN Re PDaOINSARL ID.

sO aN cluded with thin, cracked lucidity, "Chasing you was the first time I've been under heavy g since before my first crossing."

"Great.

Wonderful."

Angus tried a few obscenities, but they seemed inadequate.

"Bitch.

I never should have rescued you.

I must have been out of my mind.

It's not bad enough you're a fucking cop.

And a witness.

It's not bad enough you're going to turn me in the first chance you get.

On top of that, you're going to go crazy and try to kill me as soon as we hit heavy g."

He gouged his fingers into the sides of her face, then released her.

"I should have left you to die."

Again she surprised him.

Her gaze steadied, and her voice gave an' improbable suggestion of strength, of sarcasm.

"It's not too late.

You can still kill me.

No one will ever know."

A smile stretched his features, making him look more than ever like a malign frog.

He wasn't accustomed to the way he felt: happy; eager.

She might turn out to be exactly what he needed.

"If I did that,"

he replied, "I wouldn't have a crew."

"Crew?"

The idea seemed to focus her stubbornness.

"I'm not going to crew for you.

I'm not-"

Yet in spite of what she felt, her voice trailed away.

He wasn't paying any attention to her refusal.

Deliberately, obviously, so that she could watch everything, he in- structed the sickbay computer to prepare an anesthetic and pump it into her.

While the needle probed her veins, he savored her dismay.

As she lost consciousness, she breathed in appeal, "Get me out of this-"

"Oh, I will,"

he promised.

"I will."

If he'd been that kind of man, he would have chuckled.

Thanks to the advances of medical technology, even Bright Beauty's tiny sickbay was well-enough-equipped to administer a zone implant.

He had to unstrap her in order to get her head and shoulders out of the suit.

That was the hard part, hampered as he was by her dead weight and the confines of the cubicle.

The rest was simple.

All he had to do was tell the sickbay computer what he wanted and then get out of the way.

Cybernetic systems took care of the rest.

Long ago, he'd disconnected the sickbay computer from his ship's datacore.

Law-abiding ships had that right, to protect the privacy of their passengers and crew: as long as the sickbay computer didn't feed directly to the datacore, no permanent record was kept of who needed treatment and why; so private citizens didn't need to worry that their medical records would be used against them.

After all, crucial information-such as the presence of TIE VIRGE TA 1 SS TO RY gap-sickness-was recorded on id tags.

And any captain could add data to anyone's id file as necessary.

However, Angus' intentions had nothing to do with abiding by the law.

He simply wanted to neutralize his sickbay com- puter as a source of evidence against him.

In fact, he'd carried his precautions to the extent of programming the computer with an automatic erase, so that it immediately "forgot"

every treatment it dispensed, every procedure it performed.

According to his ofh- cial sickbay log, he was the only person who had ever been aboard Bright Beauty-and he had never used his sickbay.

Confident of his own security, he left the cybernetic systems alone while they worked on Morn Hyland, preparing her for his use.

Instead of watching what was done to her, he lifted Bright Beauty gently out of hiding and went in search of a better covert, a place where he could feel safe for the time it would take to train his crew.

Before long he found the kind of asteroid he liked: played-out and deserted, riddled with abandoned tunnels and workings which would attract nobody.

Deep in one of the old mine shafts, out of reach of any ordinary scan, he parked his ship.

Just in case he lost control of what he was doing, he shut down her drive and locked everything in the command module with priority codes.

Then he went to check on his patient.

The sickbay computer was done with her: in fact, it had already washed the anesthetic out of her body, and she was starting to wake up.

He just had time to pick up the implant control and make sure it was functioning properly before she began to stir, moving her arms groggily and blinking her eyes.

"You stink,"

he said before she was altogether able to understand him.

"Go get clean."

With an effort, she got her eyes into focus.

At the same time, she seemed to realize that her limbs were free-that he had undone the straps.

She frowned at him, struggling to think.

Reflexively, she pulled her legs up, stretched her arms.

"What're you doing?"

Her voice sounded rusty, as if she hadn't used it for a long time.

"Why did you put me to sleep?"

Watching her closely, he rasped, "I said, you stink.

Go get clean."

"Yes, sir."

She was fresh from the Academy: assent to authority still came naturally.

Her gaze blurred, and her nose wrinkled as she smelled the mess she had made in the suit.

Carefully she swung her legs over the edge of the surgery berth, eased herself into a sitting position.

Just for a second, he thought she was actually going to thank him for the opportunity to use the sanitary cubicle.

S T-E: Pi HE NSeR SS PD SOANSAGE DB SON But movement helped clear her head.

Her frown sharpened.

Gripping | the edge of the berth to steady herself, she looked at him again.

"Why am I | free?

Why did you put me to sleep?"

He bared his teeth.

"I told you.

You're my crew now.

You're mine.

- You've been impressed."

He relished the word.

"When I tell you to do something, I expect it done."

He could see suspicion mounting to panic in her face.

"You bastard,"

she breathed for the second time.

"I'm not your crew.

I'm UMCP.

I'm going to leave you rotting in lockup if it's the last thing I do.

What have you done _ to me?"

Angus didn't answer directly: he was having too much fun.

Instead, he showed her the control in his hand.

The shock when she recognized the small box was everything he could have wanted.

It was like her horror of the way she had murdered her family, like that in helplessness and extremity; and yet profoundly different in other, crucial respects.

Terror and loathing burned across her face.

Her hands sprang to her mouth; she made an attempt to cry out.

Then she hurled herself at him.

Unhindered by the asteroid's negligible gravity, she came at him like a crazy.

In her frenzy, she was so wild that she looked rabid-frantic enough to tear him apart.

But he had good reflexes.

They'd often saved his life.

And as a matter of instinct he was already braced against the bulkhead, ready.

He shoved himself to the side, moving almost as fast as she did.

At the same time, he pushed one of the main function buttons on the zone-implant control.

That one was for emergencies: it was intended to save the people around her from her fits of gap-sickness after everything else failed.

When he pushed it, she went instantly catatonic.

Limp as an empty shipsuit, she collided with the bulkhead and flopped backward.

The asteroid's small tug pulled her down slowly, so that she fell like a grotesque feather against the edge of the surgery berth and settled toward the floor.

"You stink!"

Angus raged at her, squeezing the control triumphantly.

"Go get clean.

When I tell you to do something, J expect it done."

She could hear him: he knew she could hear him.

Her eyes retained the color of consciousness.

That was the blessing-or the curse-of the zone implant's cataleptic function.

It didn't affect her mind: it only short-circuited the connection between what her mind wanted and what her body did.

She T.AHVEVRLEMA LoS TO RY could hear him; yet she lay on the floor in a heap of flaccid limbs.

If he'd taken a welding torch to her belly, she wouldn't have reacted in any way.

Her state wasn't particularly rewarding for him, however.

After a moment, he keyed off the control.

At once, a spasm ran through all her muscles, making her twitch like an epileptic.

Helpless to do anything else, she burst into a fury of tears.

Once again, she seemed to find a chink in his character, a small way in which he was unlike himself.

He let her cry for a little while, gave her a chance to understand his power over her.

Then, almost without gloating, he said, "You had enough?

Go get clean.

Down there."

He pointed along the passage toward the san and the head.

She flinched as if he'd tried to put a hand on her.

Hugging herself against the bulkhead, she looked up at him.

So thinly that he could hardly hear her, she asked, "What do you want from me?

You'll get the death penalty for this.

You might be able to get off with life imprisonment for what you did to those miners.

You might be able to convince a court you had some kind of reason-or you were just crazy.

But you can't get away with this.

Nobody ever gets away with 'unauthorized use of a zone implant.' Why are you doing it?"

Without warning, he felt vulnerable to her-violent and angry.

But he still didn't hit her.

Because of the chink she'd found in him, his answer was simple.

"I need a crew.

How else can I get a gap-sick cop to crew for me?"

Eventually she nodded, as if what he said made sense.

With misery in her eyes, struggling visibly against her fear, she got to her feet and did what he told her.

She went past him down the corridor.

For no reason he could explain-no reason he knew-he handed her a clean shipsuit before she entered the san.

By the time she emerged, however, the inexplicable inconsistency of his own behavior had made him savage.

He was a coward; and when he did things he didn't understand, things that weren't what he'd intended, things that weren't what he wanted, he scared himself.

When he was scared, he took action.

He was being weak.

He should have forced her to live in that fouled suit in order to humiliate her properly, teach her what his power meant.

What was he doing?

Was he feeling sorry for her?

The idea made him want to break her arms.

He would see her dead-he would crush her-before he would allow her to do anything that might make him weak.

And yet he contained himself until she came out of the san of her ST}ECPEREERN ERED EORN PAR DESCORN own volition.

Fuming, fretting, swelling into a fury, he still waited, storing up violence, until she opened the door herself and came out to face him.

Then he lost his self-possession.

He was already on the edge of his restraint: the sight of her pushed him past his limits.

She was clean-and being clean brought back her funda- mental beauty.

She was probably the most beautiful woman he'd ever seen this close.

And she showed a kind of courage simply by leaving the san; she had the capacity to face her fate.

Her eyes shone with a heart-wrenching combination of fright and defiance, with a dread of what he could do to her mixed with a refusal to be cowed.

And he could do anything he wanted.

She was his: he had the control to her zone implant clenched in his sweating fingers.

For that reason, he pushed the button which took away her ability to move.

Then he put down the control and beat her bloody with his bare fists, marring her beauty so that it wouldn't terrify him anymore.

Te eeeeRees glee oO R-Y, eS vatee es tig ad cad beam e oN Tn See hours passed before he came to the realization that he'd hurt himself as well as With the zone-implant control, of course, he could have overridden the damage to some extent.

As soon as she regained any measure of con- sciousness, he could have forced her into motion, made her serve him in any number of ways.

Certainly he could have muffled the sensations of damage for her.

But she would still have been useless as crew: he had left her in no condition to learn the things he needed to teach her about Bright Beauty .

He would have to give her time to recover before he could get any real use out of her.

her.

In other words, he'd increased the amount of time he would have to spend in hiding.

He'd delayed the moment when he would be able-if not safe-to travel with Morn's help instead of hindrance.

And no matter how well hidden he was, the fact remained that a stationary target was easier to find and hit than a moving one.

He'd increased the risk to himself for the satisfaction of beating her.

And he'd hurt himself in another, subtler way as well.

She was his.

Wasn't she?

Like his ship, she was in his command.

With the zone implant, he could make her do anything he wanted; perhaps by taking control of her body and directing it as he wished; perhaps by exerting neural pressure-pain ToHEMR-ESA LOS TORY and pleasure strong enough to coerce her.

He could make her (now that she - was unconscious and out of sight, his imagination began to tease him) do that.

He could do that to her.

So why was he afraid of her looks?

Beauty only made it better-only increased her humiliation, demonstrated his power more completely.

Anything that marred her took something away from him.

He was so surprised-in a sense, so shaken-by this perception that he went to her without thinking, carried her back into the sickbay, and instructed the computer to treat her injuries.

Another step.

Soon his surprise became a visceral trembling, an ague in the core of his distended gut.

New ideas were working on him.

He wasn't thinking about revenge now-about having a UMC cop as his crew, about making her suffer for what Starmaster had done to Bright Beauty.

Now his thoughts were more visceral.

He'd never had much to do with women.

In the course of his piracies, he'd captured or kidnapped a few, used them hard, then gotten rid of them.

But none of them had had Morn Hyland's capacity to make him shiver, make him do things he didn't expect.

None of them had been so entirely in his possession-or so desirable.

She was still unconscious, perhaps because of his beating, perhaps because of the drugs the sickbay computer gave her.

She had no idea what was happening as he undid her shipsuit and peeled it off her limbs.

He couldn't stop trembling.

After all,.it was a good thing that he'd hit her.

The darkness and swelling of her bruises made her bearable: if she'd remained perfect, he would have had no choice but to kill her.

So he paid no attention to the firm lift of her breasts or the velvet curve of her hips.

He concentrated exclusively on the livid hurt of her bruises as he climbed on top of her.

His orgasm was so intense that he thought for a moment he'd broken something.

Before he rolled off her, he had the satisfaction of seeing her eyes flutter open, seeing her begin to realize what he'd done.

He filled her with revulsion, even though there was nothing she could do about it.

That was good.

Nevertheless he continued trembling.

He could no longer tell whether he was excited or afraid.

"Does that make you feel like a man?"

She sounded bitter and miser- able-and faraway, as though the aftereffects of his blows muffled her dis- tress.

"Do you have to destroy me to feel good yourself?

Are you that sick?"

"Shut up,"

he replied amiably.

"You'll get used to it.

You'll have to."

S TER!

AE NR PD RORNSAEE DaSeOuN He was grinning; but he still had to brace his hands on his hips to conceal the way they shook.

As if she hadn't heard him-as if she were still on the same subject- she muttered, "It's because of men like you I became a cop."

It occurred to him that what he was doing to her might make her come apart.

Maybe she had already begun.

At the idea, he bared his teeth.

"Is that so?"

he drawled.

"I thought it was because you like guns.

Muscle.

They make you feel like a man."

Maybe she was still stupefied by blows and rape and medication: maybe she didn't hear him.

Or maybe she really was trying to threaten him.

"Forbidden space is bad enough.

We don't need any worse threats than that.

But men like you are worse.

You betray your own kind.

You prey on human beings-on human survival-and get rich."

She didn't look at him.

Perhaps if she had looked at him she would have lost the courage for what she was saying.

"I'll do anything I can to stop you,"

she recited like an article of faith.

"No price is too high for stopping a man like you."

Angus had to respond.

Involuntarily he remembered the insane bra- vado with which blind Captain Davies Hyland had tried to outface him.

He couldn't let the captain's daughter think he cared about her threats.

"Me?"

he retorted, gathering anger or pleasure as he spoke.

"I'm a danger to human space?

What about you?

I wasn't the one who blew up your ship.

I didn't make you gap-sick.

I didn't hunt you down.

I didn't even fire on you.

You killed all those cops yourself, you."

This was fun.

He was going to teach her what her threats were good for.

"I'm just a freighter captain.

You're a traitor."

He could see his words hit her: she winced and turned her head away.

As if he'd switched her off-or as if she were trying to find some hidden place where she could still believe in herself-she seemed to sink out of awareness.

Where she went, he couldn't follow.

For him, fear was a source of inspiration: it enabled him to make the sort of intuitive leap which had brought him to an understanding of her gap-sickness.

But the same inspira- tion or intuition also blinded him to perceptions which involved emotions other than fear.

The place where Morn went would have made no sense to him.

He would have assumed it was a cynical lie-the kind of falsehood which con- ceals itself in order to sting more effectively.

She was sinking down to her basic memories, to the place where she had become who she was; to her home and parents.

T HREM RETA Ess OR Y Like a little girl, unselfconsciously, she appealed to her mother and father for help.

In a sense, their power to help or hinder her, like their power to shape her life, came from the fact that they'd been so much absent.

They were both cops; and the UMCP policy of crewing ships with families stopped short of children.

In consequence, Morn was left with her grandparents (themselves retired veterans of Space Mines Inc.

Security) while Davies and Bryony Hyland served missions in the deep void, risking their lives to protect humankind from violence and forbidden space.

Morn kept the weight of this abandonment to herself.

Of course, she grieved when they went away; she thrilled with joy when they returned.

But the deeper impact she concealed.

Perhaps she herself didn't know there was any deeper impact.

After all, her parents left her in a home where she was loved and attended to; a home where a strict affirmation of law and citizen- ship was complemented by warmth and affection.

For her grandparents, as for her parents, children were the future which the UMCP labored and bled to secure.

Virtually everyone Morn knew as a child either was or had been a cop.

And they were believers: they esteemed their own work in the same way that they esteemed her, and for the same reason.

They spoke of her parents with a fundamental respect, an unquestioning validation, which taught her that what her mother and father did was the most necessary and valuable job imaginable.

Life beyond the hegemony of the UMCP thronged with pro- found perils, threats to the human species itself, which Davies and Bryony Hyland had the courage and the conviction to oppose.

Vast space was deadly: it called for valor, determination, and idealism.

How could a child question all this?

Whom could she tell that she felt abandoned-or punished?

By the time she was old enough to know the right words, they were no longer credible.

Abandonment?

Punishment?

No.

She'd been taught to see her father as an eagle, scouring the skies for predators.

And her mother was a panther, sleek and soft for her kittens, but ready with fangs and claws to fight her kittens' enemies.

In addition, her grandparents, aunts, uncles-and her parents when they were on leave-conveyed the perfect assumption that Morn herself would eventually become a cop.

Precisely because she was bright, capable, and loved, she would naturally choose to follow in her parents' footsteps.

Morn nodded solemnly, as if she were accepting her mission.

Never- theless she knew it was false.

She would never be a cop.

When the pain of her abandonment or punishment lost credibility, she learned resentment.

But S TE PCA EN SR ADSOIrNSAGL DS OnN there was no place for that in her life, so it remained hidden.

Instead of aspiring to be like her parents, she learned to hold a grudge.

Even at that age, she was able to hold a grudge steadily-and give no sign of it.

However, her resentment turned to shame-her whole emotional makeup changed-when she heard of her mother's death.

Of course her grandparents were the first to tell her that Bryony had been killed.

But in her core, where her image of her mother's invincibility resided, she didn't believe the news until she heard it from her father.

He came home on leave after the ship which he had served as first officer, the UMCP cruiser Jntransigent, limped to the haven of Orion's Reach.

As soon as his debriefing at UMCPHO permitted, he sat down with Morn and told her the story.

She saved us all, he said.

She'll be given the Medal of Valor for it.

He must have assumed that Morn would want to know this.

If she hadn't sacri- ficed herself, we would all have been lost.

He held his daughter on his lap with his arms around her as he talked.

Under the circumstances, she wasn't too old for this.

His voice was steady and clear-the voice of a man who valued what his wife had done too much to protest against it.

Yet tears ran from his eyes, collected along the certainty of his jaw, and dropped like stains onto Morn's small breast.

We picked up a distress call from the ore transfer dump off Orion's Reach.

The dump was raided.

An illegal came in on them hard, blasted most of the habitation and control centers, then took all the ore that was ready for shipping and headed away.

They would probably have been safe if the illegal had known we were in the vicinity.

But no one knew.

We were hunting.

We didn't advertise our movements.

We left medical supplies and personnel at the dump and took off after the illegal.

She called herself Gutbuster.

She wasn't fast, and she didn't show gap capability.

But she was heavily armed-as heavily armed as a battlewagon.

We'd never heard of her before.

We didn't know there were any illegal ships that powerful.

We were only a day of hard g away from Orion's Reach when we engaged her.

But by the time we drove her off, we were so badly damaged that we couldn't get back for a week.

Of course, we ordered her to come about.

We told her she was under arrest.

And we didn't charge in recklessly.

We could tell by her particle trace that she was something we hadn't seen before, so we were cautious.

But she kept on running, ignoring us.

Finally we had to attack.

We were careful-but we should have been more careful.

We were 1 PIPEVROESA LS PO OR Y too sure of ourselves.

And too angry at what Gutbuster did to the dump.

And we're cops, Morn.

We're the police.

We can't simply destroy illegals without giving them every conceivable chance to surrender.

If we did that, we wouldn't be any better than the people we're fighting.

Because we weren't careful enough, and because we gave her too much chance to surrender, her first blast ripped one whole side of Jntransi- gent open as if we had no shielding, and had never heard of evasive maneu- vers.

A pure super-light proton beam.

It was no wonder she was slow.

Every bit of energy she could produce must have been necessary to power that cannon.

Captain Davies Hyland couldn't resist lecturing for a moment.

That's why UMCP cruisers don't use them.

We need mobility and speed.

We can't afford the kind of energy-utilization priorities those cannon require.

I was on the bridge.

The bridge wasn't hit.

But that blast did us so much damage that we immediately lost targ.

The cables were cut.

We still had power, but we couldn't aim our guns.

Another beam like that would have finished us.

As it was, the only reason we survived was that Gutbuster needed time to recharge her cannon.

Your mother was on station in targeting control.

And targeting con- trol was in the part of Jntransigent that Gutbuster hit.

All the control spaces were close to the core, of course.

But that whole side of Jntransigent had been ripped open to vacuum.

Even your mother's station lost structural integrity.

A bulkhead cracked, welds parted.

Targeting control began to lose atmo- sphere.

She could have saved herself-for a minute or two, anyway.

The leak was slow enough.

She could have left her station, sealed it behind her.

The automatic systems that locked the doors had enough override tolerance for that.

But she didn't.

Instead, she stayed at her board.

While her station depressurized and her air ran out, she worked to reroute targ function so that we could use our guns.

She succeeded, Morn.

That's why Jntransigent survived, why I'm here talking to you.

She restored targ in time.

We hit Gutbuster with everything we had.

And because Gutbuster needed power to maneuver, she couldn't use her proton beam again.

We fought until she couldn't stand any more dam- age.

Then she pulled away.

But your mother was lost.

By the time she finished saving us, the automatic locks wouldn't let her out of targeting control.

Depressurization exceeded their tolerances.

You know how people die in vacuum, Morn.

It isn't pretty.

But it's S TLE P AG N @R FD ADSOUNSANL DSO WN beautiful to me, as beautiful as your mother herself.

She gave her life for her shipmates.

If I die that way myself someday, I'll die proud.

And I promise you this.

Now the look of an eagle shone through Davies Hyland's tears, as familiar as his certainty and his strong arms.

No one in the UMCP will ever rest until your mother has been avenged.

We will stop Gutbuster and every ship like her.

We will stop every illegal who sells out humanity.

By the time his story ended, Morn had decided that she, too, would be a cop.

She was too ashamed of herself to make any other choice.

She already felt-an emotion which lost credibility as soon as it was put into words-that she'd killed her mother with her secret grudge.

So she told herself that she owed it to human space, to her father, to the image of her mother, and to herself to join those who opposed the betrayal of humankind.

But those were only words.

The truth was that she was trying to recant.

However, it was a matter of historical record that Gutbuster was never stopped.

Morn learned this during her years in the UMCP Academy.

Indeed, that ship was never encountered again.

She died of her wounds in the void; or found the problematic safety of forbidden space and never re- turned; or transformed herself in some way (perhaps by replacing her data- core), changed her registration and codes so that she couldn't be recognized.

The promise Morn received from her father was never kept.

At the time, in the Academy, she took that failure as a reason to rededicate herself to her calling.

If Gutbuster and similar ships still existed, perhaps flourished, then people like Morn were needed more than ever; people who had both reason for passion and experience to give their passion focus.

She made herself one of the best cadets in her class-an honor to her father, and to her mother's memory.

If she had any questions about what she was doing-if she felt any uncertainty about her father, or the UMCP, or about her own courage-she kept that hidden, even from herself.

By the time she joined Starmaster and Captain Davies Hyland in their quest to preserve the integrity of human space, any doubts she might have retained were hidden so deep that only a man like Angus Thermopyle could have dredged them up.

But she'd killed her father.

She'd brought what was left of her family to ruin.

That struck her in the deepest part of her shame-in the part which believed she'd deserved to be abandoned; the part which believed her resent- ment had killed her mother.

When she needed them most-helpless in Bright Beauty's sickbay, a SAGEIARSECA LS a OR:  with a zone implant in her head and Angus leering over her-her parents didn't answer her appeal.

How could they?

Nothing they'd ever given her or done for her had prepared her for the crisis of gap-sickness; for the knowledge that the destruc- tive aw which endangered those she loved existed, not in illegals and forbid- den space, but in herself.

The look in her eyes as she came back from her search for courage was one of unmitigated and irremediable anguish.

"Even if I can't do it,"

she said as if her heart were hollow, "some- body else will.

It doesn't matter what you think of me.

Maybe you're right.

Maybe I'm as bad as a traitor.

But there are better cops than me-stronger- They'll stop you.

They'll make you pay for this."

Her throat closed.

The glaze across her eyes was fading.

She began to look sharper, more dangerous; her nipples were poised on her breasts as if they could do damage.

Instinctively, Angus put his hand in his pocket, closed his fingers around the control.

His grip was damp with sweat.

But she was wrong.

He had no doubt that she was wrong.

Oh, the fucking cops would stop him if they could.

They would gut his ship and kill him gladly.

But not because of what he did to her-or to those miners.

Reasons like that were only excuses, as empty as her tone.

The UMCP didn't protect people.

Why should it?

It protected money.

It protected itself.

It protected the power to despise people like Angus himself.

The cops would try to stop and kill him, not because he shed blood, but because he cut into UMC profits.

Under the circumstances, he had no idea why he'd left her alone so long; why he'd given her time to go looking for courage.

He didn't have any reason for it.

Nevertheless he was either excited or angry; and that confusion held him.

And he had the control to her zone implant in his pocket: he was secure.

Let her find courage, if she could.

The braver she was, the more pleasure he would get out of breaking her.

When he thought about breaking her, he grew erect again.

Instead of arguing with her, he removed his hand from his pocket.

A twitch of his fists parted the seals on his shipsuit, allowing him to jut out.

"They'll never get the chance,"

he rasped, showing his yellow teeth.

"T told you.

I'm a bastard.

The worst bastard you'll ever meet.

And I'm good at what I do.

I've been dancing circles around the fucking cops all my life.

If they ever catch me, it'll be long after you're dead.

"In the meantime, I'm going to have some fun with you.

You're my crew now.

You're going to learn to take orders.

And I've got old scores to SRE: Pe HE N 2Ret PD sOrNSAPLEDSSROIN settle.

A lot of them.

I'm going to settle them on you.

By the time I'm done, you're going to want to run away so bad it'll damn near kill you, but I won't even let you scream."

She glanced down at his crotch.

Her mouth betrayed an unmistakable desire to wail.

And yet she fought not to let him appall her.

Her withdrawal may not have brought her courage; nevertheless she possessed a strength of her own which had never been tested before.

Her voice shook as she said, "If nobody else stops you, I'll have to do it.

I'll get the chance somehow.

I can't _ fight a zone implant.

You've got that on your side.

But I can't crew for you while you're keeping me passive.

You'll have to let me move on my own- think on my own.

I'll get the chance."

Her defiance was secretly disturbing-and secretly stimulating.

He wanted to hit her again; but he knew that would be an inferior pleasure.

To crush her spirit would give him a positive joy.

Furthermore, it was necessary.

She was right: she wouldn't be able to crew for him under the control of the zone implant.

The requirements of the job were too complex-and the func- tions of her implant were too crude.

If he had to tell her what to do all the time, she would be useless.

If he needed her help with Bright Beauty, he would be vulnerable.

He wouldn't be able to leave his hiding place until he was sure she was broken.

And yet her spirit was part of what made her so desirable.

He didn't hesitate, however.

He'd already taken too many steps in a direction he didn't understand.

Still jutting from the seam of his shipsuit, he took out the implant control and snapped it on.

Helpless to resist, she lapsed into a pliant state similar to hypnosis; a state in which she could no longer choose her own movements.

He had to swallow several times to moisten his throat.

As he tapped buttons on the control, he rasped, "Sit up."

Eyes disfocused, features slack, she sat up on the edge of the berth.

He reached into one of the compartments along the bulkhead, se- lected a scalpel, and handed it toward her.

"Take it."

Her fingers closed involuntarily.

Only the darkness in her gaze hinted that she knew what she was doing.

He had to clench his fists to keep himself still.

He was approaching orgasm again.

"Put the edge on your tit."

The control compelled her.

She didn't need to watch what she was doing.

Blindly she moved the scalpel until the blade rested against her nipple, intense silver against brown.

The nipple was erect and hard, as if it were ready to be cut.

"You can understand me,"

he said thickly.

"I know you can, so pay TAPER RVESA- LS OR Y attention.

I can make you cut yourself.

If I want to, I can make you cut off your whole tit."

He was tempted to have her draw blood, just to demonstrate his power; but he was afraid if he did so he would come right away.

"Remem- ber that when you think about breaking my neck.

"I'm going to break you.

I'm going to break you so hard you'll start to love it, need it.

Then I'm going to break you some more.

I'm going to break you until you don't have anything but me to live for."

Her eyes were still out of focus; but he could see anguish in their depths, a wail she was unable to utter.

She looked so lost that he almost turned off the zone implant.

It would be an exquisite display of possession to make her do what he wanted by plain fear rather than with the implant-to make her return the scalpel to its compartment, then come to him, kneel in front of him, and open her mouth so that he could thrust himself down her throat.

His thumb was on the switch to release her.

But at the last moment, instinct prevailed.

He couldn't take the risk of ignoring her threats.

She might be stronger than he could predict.

If she was- The idea took some of the stiffness out of him.

Angrily, he kept her under control.

Moving like a robot-responsive to nothing but the implant's func- tions-she replaced the scalpel in its compartment.

When he instructed her to smile, she obeyed; but the lift of her lips remained as expressionless as the rest of her face.

Obediently she knelt in front of him.

His organ was no longer as intensely eager as it had been a few moments ago.

Down in the black bottom of his heart, he was disappointed.

His cowardice had cost him something he wanted.

But disappointment made him angry-and anger had its uses.

Suddenly furious, he forced open her mouth and drove himself into her, gagging her fiercely until he came.

Then a sense of depletion as sudden as his rage took everything else away.

Without a glance at her, he pushed the buttons which put her to sleep; he left her naked on the floor of the sickbay.

Thinking he was tired, he lumbered away toward his berth to get some rest.

But he wasn't tired.

What he felt wasn't fatigue: it was loss.

After several restless minutes, he left his berth and went, fuming bitterly, to Bright Beauty's bridge and the command console.

There he keyed on the cameras and screens so that he could look at the damage Starmaster had done to his ship.

x She had a cabin-size dent in her side.

Her steel skeleton was no longer true.

One part of her nose looked like it'd been hit by an impact-ram.

S FE PR EINE IN SRY ADS ORNBAGLAD=S1OON She could be repaired.

He knew where to go to get her patched and welded and sealed: fixed.

But she would never be the same again.

As he studied her wounds, Angus Thermopyle's eyes began to spill tears.

ToOHebe Rie AC cel ORLY ee Aer alee / ~~ NN Fn Pe that point on, he no longer hit Morn Hyland.

She was his, and he was ready, eager, to use her hard; but he didn't want her damaged.

Driven by anger and grief, and by a vague, inexplicable sense that he was no longer in control of his life, he used her so hard that several days passed before he could begin teaching her how to help him with Bright Beauty.

He'd never had much to do with women.

In fact, he'd never doubted that he could live perfectly well without them altogether.

But now his brain teemed with lust.

Perversions which had never occurred to him before now seemed exciting, even compulsory.

The more he saw of her helpless beauty, and the more he exercised himself on her flesh, the greater her hold on his imagination became-the more power she seemed to have over him.

It was madness to stay where he was: stationary, hidden, defenseless.

He should have been on his way to the nearest bootleg shipyard days ago.

It was weeks away under hard boost, inside the borders of forbidden space, where cops never went; he should have gotten started immediately.

But he kept thinking of things he could do to Morn-of ways to enjoy her imposed compliance-of outlets for his most intimate and personal rage.

The firm line of her thighs and the soft pillow of her belly haunted his dreams: he was kept awake by the way her breasts lifted to him despite the intensity of her loathing.

For several days, he was simply unable to think about anything else.

TA BA RS EsA La St O.R  Finally, during one of the periods when he released her from the zone implant's control so that he could take a look at her despair, abhorrence, nausea-look at them and savor them-she asked, "Why are you doing this?

Why do you hate me so much?"

They were in the sickbay because its berth was easier to use than any of the others.

She sat on the floor, against the bulkhead, with her legs hugged to her chest in misery and her face hidden between her knees.

He'd seen sewer rats on Com-Mine Station and elsewhere, derelicts, nerve-juice addicts, even null-wave transmitters, with more energy and hope than she showed.

She was breaking, as he'd promised she would.

Already it seemed impossible that she would ever have the courage to threaten him again.

And yet she was still groping-still reaching for something- "Why are you doing this?

Why do you hate me so much?"

She was like Bright Beauty: she had surprises in her.

- "What difference does it make?"

he growled, just for something to say.

"How come you're the one with gap-sickness, instead of me?

Who knows?

Who cares?

I've got you.

That's all there is."

She lifted her head a little: her eyes showed, black as rot and ruin, past her kneecaps.

Her voice twitched as if she were afraid or crazy.

"You can do better than that."

He sucked his upper lip, thinking casually.

For some reason, he felt expansive, almost magnanimous.

It was possible that she was crazy.

Posses- siveness warmed him as if it were a species of affection.

Abruptly he said, "All right.

I'll tell you something about me.

A little story to help you understand."

He was sneering.

"I had a roommate once."

Morn Hyland stared at him without any reaction at all.

"Back on Earth,"

he explained.

"In reform school.

I was a snot-nose kid-didn't know enough to keep them from catching me.

Fuckers.

Caught me helping myself in a foodvend.

But of course they didn't care I was doing it because I was hungry.

All they cared about was reforming me.

Make me 'a productive member of society.' Break me.

So they locked me up in school.

"I hated it.

One thing I promised.

Nobody is ever going to lock me up again-"

That was a digression, however: Angus had no wish to think about being locked up.

If he did, he would lose his present sense of indulgence and fall into a fury.

Over the years, he'd done some desperate things-reckless things, things that probably made him look brave.

But courage had nothing to do with them.

He'd done them to escape the danger of being locked up.

"I had a roommate,"

he resumed.

"They told me I was lucky I only ds.

PR ASEN SR DSO NSASLaDESsO.N had one.

Crowded three or four into a room was more like it.

But it wasn't luck.

They put me alone with that shithead because they thought he'd be good for me.

; "They were all cops."

The taste of their power over him made him want to spit.

"Like you.

They talked about protecting and reforming, but what they really liked was muscle.

Just like you.

Muscle to kill me.

Or break me-it's the same thing.

I was just a street rat who got caught raiding a foodvend.

I couldn't defend myself.

They thought they could beat me.

"My roommate was supposed to be a good example.

One of their big successes.

They got him for lifting paper from his stepfather's wallet, and after only five years in reform school he was on the path of virtue.

They wanted him to help reform me.

"His name was Scarl.

He was a big fucker-the kind of illegal who eats shit and smiles.

Lots of teeth.

He wanted to reform me, for sure.

Any- thing to make himself look good.

He already figured out the way to beat them was be their little darling, make them think he was sugar-make them take care of him.

I was his big chance to show off.

"It was pathetic.

He sure did want me to believe he was my friend.

So he made a big deal out of taking care of me.

Taught me how the school worked.

Didn't let the big shits pound me.

Showed me how to get perks- how to lift treats-how to be on the nice-kid list.

After a whole day of him every day, I wanted to puke.

"But I got him."

Angus had arrived at the part of the memory he liked.

"I got him.

Good old Scarl never knew what hit him.

"We had lockers.

It was supposed to be good for kids to have some- thing private.

Everybody hid the keys, like what was in the lockers was precious.

But he wasn't good at hiding things.

I took his.

"Then I raided some of their rooms, the cops'.

Lifted a bunch of small stuff-vials of nerve-juice, fancy pens, whatever I found.

And one of them had a really great collection of dirty pictures."

He bared his teeth at Morn.

"That's where I still get most of my ideas."

She didn't react, however.

"] put it all in Scarl's locker, locked it up.

Then I put his key back.

He never missed it.

"Next morning they went crazy.

They stormed into all our rooms.

Made us give up our keys and stand there naked until they got around to searching our lockers.

"When he saw all that stuff in his locker, good old Scarl fainted."

Angus forced a guffaw, but it wasn't particularly successful.

For some T HHAEM RECALL S Th O RY reason, the pleasure of what he'd done to Scarl had lost its flavor.

There was a bitter taste in his mouth, as if someone had cheated him.

Trying to muster relish for his story, he concluded, "Those dirty pic- tures finished him.

They were too embarrassing for the school.

He got shipped out.

Maybe they sent him to the big boys' lockup."

Unfortunately, he felt no relish.

"I got put in a room with a bunch of motherfuckers who liked to cornhole me when they didn't have anything better to do.

"It was like that until I finally got a chance to break out and get away."

Her stare hadn't shifted.

She was still peering at him darkly over her kneecaps, still waiting.

When he stopped, she watched him scowl for a while.

Then she asked, "What does that have to do with me?"

"Huh?"

He'd forgotten her question.

"You betrayed your roommate."

Her voice was husky with the stress of all the things he'd done to her.

"But he was the one who protected you.

Betraying him probably hurt you worse than it did him.

What does it have to do with me?"

Cursing the loss of his expansive mood, Angus sealed his shipsuit.

"It felt good.

That's what it has to do with you.

It felt good."

He started to leave in disgust; his back was turned when she said softly, thinly, "Stop this."

He paused.

"So far you've got 'authorized use.

' For this zone implant.

I'll testify to that.

I'll say you had to do it.

To save both of us.

Just stop this.

Just stop."

Angus turned to look at her, but now she was not looking at him.

"What happened to being a cop?

What happened to all those threats?

I thought you were going to find some way to do me in."

"T'm afraid,"

she murmured as if she were pleading.

"I want to live."

The way she clutched her knees and hid her features suddenly gave him the impression she'd come face-to-face with an essential cowardice.

"Tl crew for you back to Com-Mine Station.

I'll testify-I'll say you did the right thing.

They'll believe me.

I'm UMCP.

I won't say anything about those miners.

I'll'-her voice caught, but she forced herself to go on- "T'll do whatever you want.

I'll be your lover.

Just so you stop.

Stop hurting "?

me.

For one strange moment, Angus found himself listening to her as if he could be persuaded-as if she had the power to make him pity her.

Had he broken her already?

Was she really that far gone?

Almost immediately, however, the odd emotion she aroused turned to fear and anger.

S TE RP AVELNSR ee DeOINeAPL Ds ON "No,"

he rasped.

"I'm never going to stop.

I'm never going to stop hurting you.

You're too frightened.

That's what I like."

Before she could upset him anymore, he left her alone so she could use the san or rest, do whatever she wanted to get herself ready for him.

Wr Ee Epo or ORY.

Sng ate!

<pel lad & a Fn H: found, however, that his drive for her flesh had inexplicably soured.

Somehow, the memory of his new roommates in the reform school made him think harder about the dangers of his present position.

He was risking too much.

Granted that his treatment of Morn Hyland felt as good as he said it did, it still wasn't worth the risk of remaining stationary, hidden, without repairs.

He had no way to assess absolutely the damage which had been done to his ship.

Metal fatigue had strange effects.

Bright Beauty's bulkheads might have been weakened; they might start to leak soon-might even rup- ture.

And Morn was his: he could have her anytime.

Therefore it was stupid to remain where he was, risking himself to gain nothing.

While she took an interminable shower-trying, he supposed with a leer, to get clean of his touch-he began turning some of Bright Beauty's systems back on.

| First, in self-defense, he programmed a new series of priority codes and alerts, circumscribing what Morn would be able to do when he gave her access to a console; he arranged warnings for himself if she tried to do anything else.

When that was done, he started testing his scanners and sifters.

His tests confirmed what he already knew: Bright Beauty had a dan- gerous blind spot where her ports and antennae had been smashed.

That 7, IAEA RECA LAS Ee Our Y meant he would have to run her under spin, rotating constantly so the sweep of functioning sniffers and sensors could compensate for the blindness.

A problem in more ways than one: tricky for the pilot; more difficult to analyze incoming data.

But there would be one advantage.

While Bright Beauty was spinning, Morn wouldn't be able to move around: she would have to stay in her g-seat, strapped against the pull.

One less detail to worry about.

He was almost ready to summon her for her first lessons when a small blip on his screen began flashing.

His heart nearly failed at the sight.

Instinctive alarm poured through him, as if Bright Beauty were under attack.

But of course she wasn't, he knew that, knew that, despite the way his hands shook as he keyed in commands, identified the alert.

Sickbay.

Morn Hyland was no novice.

They'd taught her well in the Academy.

During the few seconds he spent identifying the alert, she succeeded in reprogramming the sickbay computer.

Her instructions copied across his screen.

She was telling the sickbay to give her a lethal injection of nerve-juice.

Morn.

Angus Thermopyle was a coward: he was at his best when he was afraid.

Without thinking about it, without time to think about it, he knew that overriding the sickbay computer from his console would be too slow.

There were too many steps to go through; the injection might start before he completed them.

And he'd long ago eliminated the automatic safeguards from his medical equipment.

Sickbay computers were programmed to pre- serve rather than endanger the lives of their patients-but scalpels and drugs were such convenient ways of getting rid of crew he despised that he'd deliberately deleted all restrictions from the sickbay systems.

Taking advantage of the asteroid's thin gravity, he flung himself out of his g-seat, kicked himself almost floating in the direction of the sickbay.

At the same time, he grabbed in his pocket for the zone-implant control.

He'd had a lot of practice during the past few days: he was adept at finding the right buttons on the control.

Hardly more than four seconds after he understood the alert, he squeezed the function button which rendered her catatonic.

But even that took too long.

She'd outsmarted him.

She'd stretched out on the berth before keying in her instructions: she'd even strapped her- self down.

The fact that she was now as blank as a disconnected circuit couldn't save her from the cybernetic probe which reached toward her from S BE PORE N&R ADSOI NSAP DES OEN the aa equipment bank, aiming its needle for the vein in the side of her neck.

As fast as fear, Angus heaved his bulk through the doorway and grap- pled for the probe.

Too quickly to be careful, he snatched at the needle with his fingers, snapped it off.

At once, the probe stopped.

A malfunction light signaled at him from the computer panel.

He ignored it.

Even though Morn was catatonic, he knotted his fists on her shoulders, shook her.

"What's the matter with you?"

he raged into her empty face.

"Are you out of your MIND?"

The fact that she couldn't respond made his desire to hit her unbear- able.

But when he let go of her to brace himself, cock his arm, one of his hands left a small smudge of blood on her shoulder.

Oh, shit.

.

He jerked up his hand, gaped at it.

Breaking the needle had scratched his fingers.

He thought he could see a clear fluid mingling with his blood around the scratch.

Oh, shit.

Nerve-juice was a clear fluid: colorless, tasteless, odorless; attractive only to neurons in their synapses; capable of killing.

With difficulty, he resisted a lunatic impulse to put his fingers in his mouth and suck at the wound.

Nevertheless, he knew exactly what to do.

Desperation was almost normal for him.

A rapid slap-and-jerk motion unstrapped Morn from the berth.

Care- less of her condition, he shoved her to the floor and climbed into her place.

Then he turned to the computer's control panel.

Emergency.

Cancel injection.

Clear malfunction.

Treat nerve-juice poisoning.

Source of poisoning: right hand.

Trying not to hurry, not to speed up the spread of the juice by hurry- ing, he stretched himself on his back and opened his right hand for the probes.

With mechanical efficiency, the probes cleaned and sealed his scratch.

Attaching a new needle, the cybernetic arm gave him an injection which-according to the monitor-contained a small dose of a block that would cause the nerve-juice to be flushed out of him as waste rather than absorbed as poison.

THHAEM ROECA LAS 7 ORY Coincidentally, the shot also contained a significant amount of cat to ease his supercharged pulse and respiration.

The whole treatment took less than a minute.

Feeling a little light-headed, a little giddy, Angus sat up and looked at Morn Hyland's crumpled form.

She was wearing a shipsuit.

Even though she intended to kill herself, she'd gotten dressed first.

Maybe she could no longer bear the sight of her own body-of the physical frame which had brought the spirit inside so much grief.

Despite the shipsuit, however-and despite her contorted pos- ture, arranged for her by the force of his shove and the asteroid's g-she'd never looked so poignant to him, so lost and desirable.

Cat was having a strange effect on him.

A sense of eerie calm filled him as he took the zone-implant control out of his pocket and released her.

A twitch ran through her: her eyes jerked open.

For a moment she seemed unable to focus her mind on what had happened.

Then she saw the way he was looking at her, and her whole face turned to despair.

"Get up,"

he said gruffly, but without violence.

As if what she felt were choking her, she remained where she was at first, clamped rigidly about herself and unable to move.

Slowly, however, the spasm eased.

She unbent her limbs, got her legs under her; finally she stood in front of him.

But she refused to lift her eyes to his face.

In his mind, he saw himself hitting her.

He felt his arm rise heavily, felt the shock as the back of his fist caught her face.

She deserved it.

But he didn't do it.

His calm was amazing.

Maybe he'd accomplished something wonderful by making her des- perate enough to attempt suicide.

"T want you alive,"

he said quietly.

"If you ever try that again, I'm going to do things to you that'll make what you've already been through look romantic.

Don't think there isn't anything worse.

There is.

If I want, I can take you to the nearest bootleg shipyard and make you a public screw for every syphilitic illegal in the whole fucking belt."

Then he shifted himself off the berth.

In a state of grace, as if he'd just granted her absolution, he said, "Come on.

I want you to start earning your keep,"

and lumbered away toward Bright Beauty's command module.

He still wasn't sure why he hadn't hit her.

Must have been the effect of the cat.

Or of the possibility that soon she might be desperate enough to fall in love with him.

STREP RE NERS ADIOINSAL DS ON Coin eae balms Q P ~~ Sr Sa ee emenn = ates Aad in ON Jn I: fact, he had every intention of taking her to the nearest bootleg shipyard.

He also had every intention of castrating the first man who so much as put a finger on her.

He discovered, however, he didn't have that choice.

The truth came to him two days later, while Morn was running Bright Beauty through a warm-up, getting ready to lift out of hiding.

Morn was a fast learner-much faster than he'd expected.

And one thing she'd learned was how to obey him in a way he found reassuring, a way which defused his possessive desire to keep all of Bright Beauty under his control.

She'd become subdued, pale in her emotions as well as in her looks.

Apparently her sheer abhorrence of his lusts had broken down her resistance to him.

And at the same time she was reassured, stabilized, by the fact that she now had something to do, a role which involved ships and skill.

As if she were actually grateful to him for letting her work, she obeyed him so implic- itly and so well that she instilled confidence.

Impressed despite himself by the speed, accuracy, and compliance with which she served his ship, he went so far as to disconnect some of his waldos and relays, transferring a number of secondary functions to her console.

As soon as he did that, of course, he worried about it.

But a little ingenious programming enabled him to install a parallel control for her zone implant on his board, so that he could turn her on and off without having to T HSE VARIESA WL ES THO RY reach into his pocket-a reach which might not be easy in a crisis, under spin - and g.

: Calm once again, he actually stopped watching what she did and let her get Bright Beauty ready for lift-off by herself.

While she worked on that, he spent some time analyzing his finances.

Then he spent more time cursing savagely to himself-all the more savagely because he didn't want her to hear him, so he had to keep his mouth shut.

Money was why he couldn't go where he'd intended.

No matter how well they knew him-maybe because of how well they knew him-the ship- yard just inside forbidden space wouldn't so much as cycle their airlocks for him on spec.

Even their hunger for the goods he supplied, the goods they fenced for him, wouldn't inspire them to extend credit.

If he were unable to pay in advance for the work Bright Beauty needed, the work wouldn't be done.

And if he tried to run a bluff, he risked murder or worse; risked having his ship snatched from him.

Of course, repairs were cheaper on Com-Mine Station.

And some people were even given credit.

But that was out of the question.

In order for the Station shipyard to do repairs, the workmen would need access to some of his ship's secrets.

And they would never keep what they discovered to them- selves: he was sure of that.

They would talk; and Security would hear about it; and he might never get out of dock again.

He couldn't get Bright Beauty fixed until he had more money.

He chewed on that for a while, until the implications made him feel cornered and murderous-more like his old self than he had felt for days.

Then he snapped at Morn, "Shut down."

He appreciated the way she obeyed, without hesitation; so he glared at her like a butcher of babies as she quickly and precisely reversed the warm- up, settled Bright Beauty to cool, and keyed off her console before turning to face him.

"T'm sorry,"

she said dully.

"What did I do wrong?"

Her assumption that she'd made a mistake pleased him, despite his anger.

He dismissed it with a snarl.

Brutally, trying to startle the truth out of her because for some reason he was reluctant to trust anything she might tell him under the influence of her zone implant, he demanded, "How many people back on Com-Mine know you're after me?"

She was startled; he saw that.

Several different responses, flickered like hints across her face before she spoke.

"We weren't after you."

"You found me, didn't you?"

he rasped.

For some reason, it fright- STEPH ENR POFOANZARE DS ON ened him to realize he was going to believe whatever she told him.

"You can't expect me to think you were looking for those pissed-out miners.

Captain Davies fucking Hyland knew my name.

Of course you were after me."

"Yes."

She spoke slowly, as if she had trouble remembering that part of her past.

"Sort of.

We didn't know anything about you when we came out from Earth.

I mean personally.

But Com-Mine Security gave us your name.

Just a list of 'suspicious characters'--people to watch out for, ships.

They didn't do that because we're UMCP.

They didn't know.

It's standard proce- dure for them-they give the same list to any legitimate oreliner that asks.

And a lot of rumors mentioned you.

We correlated that with the way you pulled out so soon after we arrived.

Almost like you knew who we were.

That made us interested in you.

Very interested.

How did you know who we were?

' "But we weren't after you specifically.

We were on patrol, that's all.

Looking for pirates.

Mine jumpers.

Bootleg operations.

We just happened to find you."

The effort of memory hurt her: she had to reach back through so much horror.

Therefore she was telling the truth.

"

Just happened,' "

he snorted.

"Don't try to con me, bitch.

I was in a played-out part of the belt.

The only people there who need protecting are scavengers.

Like those miners.

You don't patrol places like that.

You patrol where the money is."

Again her expression hinted at horror.

She'd killed her whole family.

"You forget.

We were covert-pretending to be a new oreliner.

If we wanted to lure anybody after us, we had to go somewhere unexpected-somewhere that would surprise people who knew the belt.

"That's the main thing we were trying to do.

Lure somebody like you to follow us.

"But I suppose we were after you, in a way.

Even if we weren't covert, it's standard practice for ships like Starmaster to go where they aren't ex- pected.

Shake people up a little.

And the way you headed out when we came in made us think you were ripe for shaking.

We didn't know where to find you, but we thought it made sense to scan the nearest played-out parts of the belt first, just to see what we could stir up.

Where would a ship go if she wanted to hide?

"I guess it was a deliberate coincidence.

It happened because we were trying to make it happen.

We were looking for you.

But we weren't doing anything out of the ordinary."

She spoke tonelessly, without expression, hold- ing herself numb to pain.

"Until you blasted those miners, we knew there was always the chance you were innocent."

"All right.

All right."

His glare was yellow with malice and fear, but TPE ROECA LAS Hi ORY he didn't get out of his g-seat, or make her come to him, or work any of the buttons on her zone-implant control.

"If you fuckers left me alone, none of this would have happened.

You haven't answered my question.

Who did you tell?

Who knew what you were doing?"

For a moment or two she remained silent, staring at her board.

Then she sighed.

"Nobody.

That's the whole point of going covert.

When we come out from Earth, we don't know who we can trust.

So we don't tell anybody anything.

We do our job and take the rest one step at a time.

"The last mission my fa-Captain Hyland was on, somebody in Sta- tion Center turned out to be feeding information to half a dozen pirates.

It's better if we don't tell anybody anything."

Angus believed her.

In fact, the only reason he'd doubted her at all was that the intensity of his need to believe her made him suspicious.

Every- thing hinged on it.

At the moment, he had no other hope.

He couldn't run Bright Beauty in this condition indefinitely.

Sooner or later, she would fail him if he put that much pressure on her.

But if Morn were telling the truth- If she were telling the truth, he could get away with it.

It might be the riskiest bluff he'd tried in years, but he could get away with it.

If she were telling the truth.

And if he could control her.

If he could break her into small enough pieces.

Abruptly he heaved himself out of his g-seat.

"Come on."

Ignoring the involuntary revulsion that ached across her features before she could suppress it, he headed toward the sickbay.

"You kept your mouth shut for the cops.

I'm going to make sure you do the same for me."

In the sickbay he studied her face, drilled her, dredged the informa- tion he needed out of her, and drove himself between her legs in spasms of fear and hope.

Eagerly, avidly, he watched her for signs that she was falling in love-that she was growing dependent on her helplessness.

STTREFPEHSE AN SRP BDEORNSAELGDESCORN aks Za ocd be ea LO SN Fn H: did his best to believe it was happen- ing.

In an odd way, as long as he kept her alive his survival depended on her: he could be truly safe only if he killed her and disposed of her body.

And that option was one he no longer consid- ered.

He was as likely to destroy Bright Beauty as to murder Morn.

Therefore he couldn't afford to be wrong.

He had to break her and be sure of it; damage her so much that he could trust the results.

, Because he was afraid, he was in no danger of trusting them prema- turely.

In the end, however, his success was inevitable.

After all, what choice did she have?

He'd made himself her entire world; he was everything she felt.

He knew how this kind of pressure worked: it had been tried on him more than once.

His control of her cireumstances-as well as of her physical being -was absolute.

With the tap of a button, he could reduce her mind to a brute howl of pain.

When she satisfied him, he could reward her, not with pleasure-for some reason, he was reluctant to see what she would look like pleased-but with relief from hurt; with sleep; with the occasional opportu- nity to choose her own movements, take care of herself in her own way.

By degrees, he beat her down until she was like a child toward him: dependent; urgent to please.

He taught her that his survival was hers as well; that any peril he met would hit her first, and harder.

And he played on the TIVEAREA LOST ORY ot bizarre ethic to which she'd sworn herself when she became a cop.

Again and again, he assured her that she deserved what was happening to her.

She'd killed her family, hadn't she?

She'd betrayed them all.

No, it wasn't some- thing she'd done by conscious choice.

It was worse: it was something she'd done because of who she was; because of the fundamental flaw which left her vulnerable to gap-sickness.

With all his cunning, he worked to deprive her of her capacity to think in any terms which didn't come to her from him.

And he watched the results, studied them with a coward's intuitive precision.

He saw the darkness accumulating in her gaze; the gradual slacken- ing of her skin; the change in the way she moved, so that every action became a limp.

When he fucked her, he felt her begin to respond, driven to swallow her revulsion by self-loathing and the need to satisfy him.

When she slept, he heard her whimpering for help which never came.

At last even his grubby, suspicious nature believed that she'd been damaged enough to risk.

Still cautious, he prepared his safeguards and coercions.

Then, with a UMC cop for crew, he took his ship out of hiding.

Six days later, Bright Beauty sputtered into Com-Mine Station's con- trol space and requested permission to dock.

No one asked any awkward questions at that point.

No one had rea- son to: no one knew Starmaster was lost.

Bright Beauty was given permission to dock and instructed to await normal inspection.

The inspector assigned to clear Angus Thermopyle and Bright Beauty wasn't particularly interested in his job that day.

Even brain-numb on cat, however, he could hardly have failed to notice the anomalous fact that Angus had left Com-Mine Station purportedly alone and now returned with a woman as crew.

He didn't ask Angus to explain this detail.

He had no wish to risk making a fool of himself.

Instead, he got Morn's name and fed it into the Station's id computer.

After that, the situation got messy.

Bright Beauty was slapped in quarantine, and a whole parade of in- spectors trooped through her, asking questions, issuing directives, making demands.

As the inspectors went up in rank-therefore in determination to be obeyed-their questions and directives and demands became more aggres- sive and personal.

And all of them were aimed at Morn Hyland.

S TXE FASE NR ADIO) NZAB ID SSOuN What happened to Starmaster?

How did you survive?

How did you end up with him?

Unfortunately, the authorities found themselves in a frustrating posi- tion.

Center was worried-in fact, outright alarmed-about Starmaster.

Se- curity practically salivated for the chance to get their hands on Angus.

But they had nothing to go on: no formal record of the truth about Starmaster; nothing but hints.

And Morn refused to answer their questions.

She was a cop-and she refused.

Periodically, an inspector tried to appropriate Bright Beauty's data- core.

Angus positively declined to release it until he was required to do so by law-until he was formally charged with a crime.

Periodically, attempts were made to get Morn away from him.

Each time, she brandished her UMCP id tag and dismissed any superior authority.

Although she chose not to speak, she tacitly covered Angus with her police mantle.

The more perceptive Station personnel observed that there was more than a little pain in the way she stood beside Angus.

For a cop, she looked unusually vulnerable; almost frightened.

If they'd met her alone in the halls of DelSec, they would have assumed she was a derelict.

If they were kind, they would have tried to help her.

But here they could do nothing.

Her id tag put her beyond challenge.

And Angus held his ground with his hands in the pockets of his shipsuit, glowering at everybody and stonewalling expertly.

What happened to Starmaster?

Blew up, he answered for her.

For no reason.

Must have been sabo- tage.

We'll give you the coordinates if you want to search the wreck.

How did you survive?

Freak accident.

The auxiliary bridge held.

She still would have died eventually, but I rescued her.

Angus could see the terrible hurt behind her eyes, but he relied on the zone implant to keep her quiet.

And he relied on her silence-and her id tag -to baffle the inspectors.

Why are you with him?

He's a known pirate.

We just haven't been able to prove it yet.

You're UMCP.

What kind of hold has he got on you?

Do you actually expect us to believe he's telling the truth?

I don't care what you believe, Angus said with relish.

I told you.

Starmaster blew up.

She was sabotaged.

That must have been done here.

Before she left Com-Mine Station.

Morn nodded dully.

Angus glowered at TAFEARCEVA Las TO RY everybody and kept his hand in his pocket.

She doesn't know who she can trust, but she's damn sure she can't trust you.

The inspectors wheedled and demanded, but they were unable to make Morn speak.

The only question they really wanted Angus to answer was: What happened to your ship?

You look like you've been in a dogfight.

Look again.

Scan me.

That isn't matter fire.

I got hit by a rock.

An experienced "captain"

like you?

That must have been some rock.

I was in the belt.

I was running Bright Beauty by myself.

I miscalcu- lated.

Is that a crime?

The inspectors were in no mood to give up, however.

They tried to trap him.

Starmaster was after you.

You crashed trying to run.

Isn't that the truth?

.

No.

Then how did you happen to be the one who came to the rescue- you with a damaged ship?

Coincidence.

I was close enough.

The blast made my scan go crazy.

Radio interference.

Particle noise.

That kind of static doesn't happen unless there's been a disaster, so I tracked it back and found her.

With an effort, Angus refrained from pointing out how virtuous his conduct had been.

The dock manifest says you left without buying supplies.

Your air scrubbers should have failed a long time ago.

How come you're still breath- ing?

Rescuer's privilege.

I took filters from her ship.

His bluff was working.

As long as Morn didn't come apart under the strain, he was going to be safe.

Why is she staying with you?

What's your hold on her?

She's going to hire somebody to carry a message back to Earth.

We'd do it ourselves, but Bright Beauty can't cross the gap.

When UMCPHO sends out instructions, she'll know what to do.

Until then, she trusts me more than you.

In the end, the inspectors had no choice.

Of course, they didn't believe the story.

Under other circumstances, they might have stretched the law far enough to keep Bright Beauty quarantined at least until Station techs had a chance to visit and analyze Starmaster's wreckage.

But Morn Hyland was UMCP; not under Station jurisdiction.

The assumption had to be made that she knew what she was doing, that her actions were reasonable and shouldn't be interfered with.

Bright Beauty was cleared.

Ss TSE PH EN eRe 7OZ0O1 NSAP DS OWN Angus Thermopyle took Morn Hyland directly to DelSec.

His bluff had worked.

He had no actual desire to go to Mallorys.

He wanted to seal his hatches and fuck Morn until she wept.

It was still possible that his hold on her might snap, and he didn't want to risk her in public.

But he knew he was going to be watched for a long time-at least until inspectors got back from Starmaster.

It was important to behave normally.

At that moment, "normal"

meant Mallorys, where he could start trying to buy the information he needed to make money.

He'd been walking down the path to his doom for some time.

Now his doom started moving toward him.

Even though she was unfamiliar with DelSec, he stayed half a step behind Morn's shoulder so he could keep an eye on her.

At once elated and afraid, possessive and angry, he noticed how every man they passed looked at her-noticed it and hated them.

In the same way that he'd planned revenge against Starmaster for driving him off Com-Mine Station, he now evolved elaborate, impossible schemes which would teach all these bastards to fear him.

It was conceivable that he could claim salvage on Starmaster.

Morn's UMCP id tag might make that possible.

With enough money, he would get Bright Beauty rebuilt, better than before.

Then he would be invulnerable.

He could do anything he wanted.

Dreams like that helped him endure the crowds he despised in Del- Sec and Mallorys.

He hated Mallorys, of course.

But it was better than any of the alternatives.

As a group, the drunks and ruins and illegals there knew more and cared less than the rest of the people in DelSec.

They meant him harm in ways he understood.

For that reason, they were less dangerous than they thought.

Station gravity-roughly .J{g-made him feel leaden, bloated; he was in no mood for a drink.

His bluff had worked!

But everybody on Com-Mine was waiting for him to make a mistake and get caught; all the inspectors, everybody in Security, every prospector or miner who'd ever tried the belt, everybody in Mallorys who knew his reputation and didn't trust him.

And Morn walked as if the weight meant nothing-as if in spite of the many ways it could be hurt, her body carried its beauty easily.

All those men wanted her.

They wanted to get her away from him.

TIHtE REA Le sit O'R  He was already feeling frightened and bloodthirsty when he caught sight of Nick Succorso through the heat and din of Mallorys.

At once, he felt like he'd been hit in the chest by an impact-ram- more so because he .couldn't show it, didn't dare react in front of all these people, let them see his weakness.

He would have recognized Nick as an enemy immediately in any case: he knew how to interpret that careless grin, that sharp, buccaneering gleam of humor and superiority.

He knew Nick's contempt for him was instanta- neous.

He was ugly and luckless and not very clean, and Nick had already begun to sneer at him.

Under any circumstances, Angus would have gone a long way out of his way to damage Nick Succorso.

That was instinctive and fundamental, like his initial panic when he saw Starmaster.

But this was worse, much worse: this was like watching someone aim a rifle straight into his face and fire.

He saw Nick glance at him, dismiss him -and look at Morn.

He saw the scars that underlined Nick's gaze darken, as if his vision had begun to smolder.

And he saw Morn's reaction.

Her face betrayed nothing.

She said nothing.

But he knew her inti- mately-knew every pulse of her heartbeat, every hue of her skin, every shade of horror and hurt in the depths of her eyes.

He knew immediately, in front of all those people, without another second for consideration or effort, that Nick Succorso had more power over her than he did.

Nick had the power to make her want him.

And yet that recognition was only the beginning: the full truth was still worse.

Until this moment, when he saw and understood-or thought he understood-the way Morn and Nick looked at each other, Angus Thermopyle hadn't known how weak he really was.

He hadn't realized how much power he lacked-and how much he wanted that power, how much he grieved for it.

He could make-had made-Morn do anything and every- thing his lust or loathing conceived.

Like a drunk or a derelict, he'd believed that was enough.

But it wasn't enough, oh no, never enough, not now.

He'd duped himself, blinded and fooled himself.

He'd taught her to cooperate in her own degradation.

He'd taught her to act as if he were necessary to her.

No matter what he did, however, he could never make her want him.

The buttons on the zone implant control which tuned her so that every nerve in her body obeyed his desire were impotent compared to the jaunty burn of Nick's gaze.

It wasn't fair.

She belonged to Angus.

She was his.

He had no way to know he was wrong.

SISEIP A SEIN  Re ADIORNGARL aD ES<OIN et ort ei Ik ; : = SN Jn he truth was that Morn Hyland didn't see Nick Succorso as a sexual being at all.

On that point, everyone who noticed her situation or gave any thought to her reactions was wrong.

She hardly noticed Nick was male.

If she had, she would have turned her back on him, would have refused him with the same debased instinct for survival which had caused her to refuse any possibility of hope which the Station inspectors might have represented.

She didn't want a man.

Any male touch would have made her ache to scream and puke, just as Angus himself did.

She'd been raped and raped until the violation had reached through her flesh to her spirit; pain and abhorrence had soaked into the marrow of her bones.

If Nick Succorso had put his hand on her as a man, she would have flinched away, exactly as she did when Angus touched her.

Angus had more power over her than he realized.

Yet he was right when he sensed that something leapt up inside Morn at the sight of Nick Succorso.

That "something,"

however, had nothing whatever to do with Nick's handsomeness, his virility, his physical appeal.

Instead it had to do with his look of raffish eagerness, his scarred and buccaneering appearance of bravado.

She wanted him, not as a man, but as an effective force.

He might be strong and cunning-not to mention unscrupulous-enough to destroy the man who was destroying her.

T HABY RECA LoS TORY Did she think Nick might set her free, redeem her from her anguish?

No.

Angus had come too close to breaking her.

She no longer had the imagi- nation-or the courage-to dream so far.

But he'd taught her how to hate.

And she had learned that lesson profoundly.

Her own hate lived with the pain and abhorrence in the marrow of her bones.

The "something"

which had leapt up in her at the sight of Nick Succorso was simply the hope that Angus could be beaten.

As for Nick himself- Like Angus, the other people in Mallorys were wrong about him as well.

Oh, he noticed her beauty immediately and was attracted to it.

His virility was no sham: his taste for lovely female flesh never left him.

In part for that reason, he had nurtured a wide reputation as a lover.

But he had other reasons also.

He liked winning, so he did whatever was necessary to make his women respond to him passionately.

And he had a hunger for revenge; especially sexual revenge.

He yearned to get even.

The truth-which he kept to himself-was that he didn't actually like women.

In secret, he feared and despised them.

Their bodies had value only to the extent that his response to them could draw an even greater response from them.

Where such satisfactions weren't at issue, he had no interest in them.

He preferred seeing them hurt.

The explanation for this was a mystery only in the sense that he never spoke of it.

Once, when he was barely a man in years, and no more than a boy in experience, he'd been bested by a woman.

And as she beat him, cheated him, ruined his dreams, she sneered at him.

His scars were the marks of her contempt, the visible sign that she hadn't considered him worth killing.

Everyone else she had killed, every other man on that ship, nearly twenty of them; but him she'd left with only his scars to remember her by.

There was nothing he could do that would make her fear him.

That ship had been the original Captain's Fancy, the insptfation of the name Nick now used for his pretty frigate.

The love he felt for his present ship was an echo of his yearning for that earlier vessel.

She'd been his dream from the moment when he'd first become old enough to have such dreams.

Nick Succorso-which, incidentally, wasn't his real name-had been born station-bound in the same sense that some people were planet-bound, unable or unwilling to leave for one reason or another.

He was the son of a family of administrators living on a station like Com-Mine, but half a hun- dred parsecs away, a station that tended one of the official (therefore rich) trading routes between Earth and forbidden space.

There he'd begun watch- SEE PALE NER + DsOtNeArL Des OTN ing scan at an early age, just as most of the children of administrators did on that station, to learn the skills they would need for the rest of their lives.

Unlike most of his peers, however, he'd fallen in love with what he watched, with the vast gulf of space and the lure of the gap, with the ro- mance of sailing the imponderable stellar winds, with the mysterious lurch- and-translation which took men and ships across dimensions beyond the reach of their former lives.

Specifically, he'd fallen in love with Captain's Fancy.

She seemed to him the bravest of the best, a trim metal sheath of power which pierced the heavens and the gap.

Her lines were sleek, yet she bristled with weapons.

Her holds were huge, yet she swept across scan and _ docked and undocked as gracefully as a creature of the great deep.

Her crew were exotic men drawn from the strangest parts of the galaxy, men with the strength to pit themselves against the vacuum and forbidden space, and the wealth they traded was fabulous.

Young Nick Succorso ached to sign aboard their ship under any imaginable contract or conditions.

Good heavens, no!

said his mother.

Are you out of your mind?

asked his father.

As for the captain of Captain's Fancy, he simply said, No.

Regal as a lord in his braid and authority, he dismissed Nick out of hand.

If the com- mand second hadn't taken pity on Nick's crushed look, Nick never would have been given any explanation at all.

But the command second, who meant well, had taken the time to say, Forget it, kid.

We never take crew from stationers.

Too much trouble.

Haven't got the instincts.

Only way you'll ever get on a ship is, go to one of the academies.

Earth.

Aleph Green.

Orion's Reach.

Good heavens, no!

his mother repeated.

Are you out of your mind?

demanded his father.

What makes you think we've got that kind of money?

Nick was never stupid.

He could see his dreams curdling.

He would never be able to earn "that kind of money"

by himself.

The only jobs which paid that well were jobs on ships.

But he couldn't bear to see his dreams curdle, so he let something else inside him go sour.

He began to plot crimes.

In those days, piracy was a constant and maddening problem across the shipping lanes.

The UMC Police were relatively new; their ability to enforce the laws Earth made didn't reach far.

And forbidden space didn't appear to make any reliable distinction between sanctioned and dishonest trade.

THE REAL STORY With the logic of the young, Nick reasoned that wherever there was piracy, there were pirates.

And wherever there were pirates, there was a demand for information.

Destinations.

Cargoes.

Arrival dates.

Departure trajectories.

Route clearances.

Nick worked scan.

Indirectly, at least, he had access to that kind of information.

Even as a youth, hardly a young man yet, he was someone whose chances came to him when he needed them, when he was ready for them.

As soon as he was sour enough, and had made his plans sufficiently concrete, and had developed his access to information, he met the woman who scarred him.

The scars came later, of course.

She knew what she was doing and did it well.

First came casual conversation.

Casual drinks.

Casual sex.

His first casual mention of Captain's Fancy passed as if she hadn't heard it.

Only after he'd told her enough about his plans, his information, his needs-only then did she let him see the hunger in her eyes.

She wanted that ship.

And he was really just a kid.

He didn't have any trouble convincing himself that she wanted Captain's Fancy the same way he did.

So he betrayed the ship he loved.

He thought he would end up as part of her new crew.

Eventually-so the dream went-he would end up as her new captain.

} For what he later swore was the last time in his life, he was wrong The woman took him with her aboard her own ship.

He was with her as she ambushed Captain's Fancy, crippled the merchanter, forced the vessel to surrender.

He accompanied her when she boarded the drifting hulk.

Already reality diverged from his dream.

Captain's Fancy wasn't sup- posed to be ruined like this.

As for the regal captain and his crew-Nick wanted them humiliated, of course; but he was a bit young to stomach such frank slaughter.

Nevertheless reality continued to diverge.

The woman didn't take him with her when she left.

After killing the crew, emptying the holds, gutting the communication gear, she laughed at Nick and scarred him and abandoned him.

He pleaded, of course.

He believed he loved her.

He believed she loved him.

He was young enough to have persuaded himself of almost any- thing for the sake of his dreams.

But his ideas of love only made her giggle in scorn.

Her knife told him what she thought of having him in her bed.

When she left, there were tears streaming through the blood into his mouth.

S WE PH AE N GRU ADIOUNSARL ID SOW After that, he was alone on a wreck a million kilometers from the station, with no skills, no knowledge-and no engines.

By rights, he should have died.

He didn't.

Instead, he became the Nick Succorso he was now.

By the time he'd contrived to be rescued-some rather ingenious manipulation of Captain's Fancy's residual emissions produced the effect of a beacon and eventually attracted a passing cruiser-he'd assumed the id files and certifica- tions of the ship's cabin boy, the real Nick Succorso, and had taught himself the skills to back up his new credentials.

Once rescued, of course, he'd given the UMCP everything he knew about the woman who cut him.

That enabled them to harry her out of his part of space.

He never saw her again.

Naturally, however, he never forgot her.

From the time of his first legitimate shipboard post until the day when he snatched the present Cap- tain's Fancy for himself, from the moment of his first successful raid until now, she was always with him.

His scars grew dark under his eyes whenever he saw something he wanted, something that wasn't his; the slashes on his cheeks turned the color of curdled blood.

Under other circumstances, he wouldn't have lifted a finger to help Morn Hyland.

Women in pain were the next best thing to women who loved him.

Both pain and love helped him get even.

But under these circumstances- Nick Succorso was drawn to the idea of rescuing Morn for several reasons.

Angus Thermopyle himself was one of them.

Nick knew Angus' reputation, of course: he knew Angus wasn't just a competitor; he was a dangerous competitor.

And Nick was prepared to tolerate competition only as long as it wasn't good enough-wasn't dangerous enough-to get in his way; to cast him in the shade.

He saw Morn Hyland immediately as a handle on Angus, a lever to use against the competition.

His other reasons were more complex.

Her relevance-if any-to his concerns as the master of Captain's Fancy was unclear.

Did he see her as a source of wealth?

Did he mean to exact ransom from the Hyland family?

From Com-Mine Station?

The UMCP itself?

He may have had a source of information about her that wasn't generally available.

If so, he didn't mention it.

However, her relevance to his personal buccaneering was plain enough.

In some of its details, her condition was obvious at a glance.

She was attached to a man she hated, fixed to an illegal who repelled her.

What did that imply about her?

On this point, his reasoning was unique in Mallorys.

TAHAEVRSECA LAS i-O UR Y For him, her attachment implied, not that she was subject to coercion, but that her capacity to respond was so' intense, so overwhelming, that she couldn't control it.

She couldn't help herself.

And if she had that kind of response to someone like Angus Thermopyle, if her own passions left her that abject- Nick Succorso's scars darkened and his mouth actually went dry at the thought of how Morn's passions might make her respond to him.

So Angus Thermopyle was wrong about Nick-as wrong as he was about Morn herself.

But he was also right.

The danger was real.

Without a word to each other, with no more contact between them than a gaze or two, they had banded together against him.

And he had to face it all, realize it all, and swallow it, show nothing.

Instinct was of no use to him here.

He was cornered by his situation, trapped with a perception he would have cheerfully committed murder to avoid.

He needed money.

Therefore he needed Mallorys; needed the people who came to Mallorys and sold secrets.

In addition, Security was watching him.

Even in DelSec, there were spies.

He was being studied for any sign of a mistake, scrutinized for any evidence of weakness.

He couldn't afford to give himself away by retreating; by revealing that he recognized his danger.

He stayed where he was, keeping his mask of belligerent disinterest in place, simply because he was afraid of the consequences if he did anything else.

Gruffly he ordered Morn to a seat at one of the condensation-stained tables-a seat with her back to Nick Succorso.

He made sure the way he talked to her was loud enough to be overheard, so her obedience would be noticed.

Then he sat down beside her and squeezed her against him posses- sively.

Look at us, you bastards, you motherfucking sons of shit.

Look at her She's mine.

Mine!

He put on a good performance.

Nobody in Mallorys knew that he'd witnessed the way Morn and Nick looked at each other, that he'd felt the electricity between them.

But his success gave him no satisfaction.

It was Morn he wanted, her desire, her willingness-the parts of herself which he'd been unable to extort from her; the parts which she'd just given away.

He was going to have to kill Nick.

There was no other answer.

There was no other way to hurt her enough, to punish her for doing this to him.

Through a haze of rage and grief, he ordered drinks he didn't want and paid for them.

He heard people talking around him.

Some of them spoke to him.

He spoke to some of them.

The ones who mattered knew why he was here, what he wanted; he didn't need to go looking for them, not yet.

By no flicker of attention or shift of expression did Morn betray she STEP H'E NERw POZOINSARLID S.O WN knew Nick Succorso was alive.

But Angus read the heightened hue of her skin and thought he understood it.

Through sheer force of panic, he stayed in Mallorys for more than an hour: long enough to appear normal; to ensure the word would be passed that Angus Thermopyle was back on station; long enough so no one would guess he was afraid.

Then he took Morn back to Bright Beauty.

She expected trouble.

He saw it in the covert way she glanced at him, in the concealed alarm and compliance of her posture.

She had a secret now, an intention she needed to protect.

Well, good for her.

He meant trouble.

He was perfectly willing to defile and humiliate every inch of her to take the sting out of his heart.

His stomach was a knot of black hate, and his brain was so full of violence he could hardly keep his balance.

When they'd boarded the ship, he made a deliberate and meticulous show of sealing the hatches, rigging security alarms, cutting off communica- tion; isolating Bright Beauty from the Station, as if he wanted to prolong the suspense for her, give her every chance to be terrified by what was coming.

After that, he engaged her zone-implant control.

He planned only to make her passive.

He wanted her to see and feel everything he did.

But his fingers seemed to have a mind of their own.

His whole body ignored the dark ruin clamoring inside him.

Instead of tuning Morn to passivity, or even catatonia, he pushed the buttons which put her to sleep.

Then he scooped her up in his arms and carried her to a berth.

He settled her on the thin mattress; adjusted a pillow under her head; tucked a blanket around her, securing it to its g-seals.

While his stomach clenched and tore, and his brain reeled, he left her and closed off the passage- way to her cabin, locking himself alone in the command module.

Then he started to howl like a grief-stricken beast.

fHEOR GALS TORY ' - ~~ a oil ancien Sophia et > Pa fan sani  ares Saabiov re Lda i 2  ; -e at i - | ' tail ie le "eas .

.

a] "

' Fe he emia lien ce ' Sa SN Fn H: would have been better off if he had gone to a bootleg shipyard, of course.

Perhaps he could have sold Morn's favors for the money he needed to get Bright Beauty made whole.

Power over her would have brought a much higher price there than on Com-Mine Station.

And-assuming Nick Suc- corso followed him-he could have faced his enemy in a more naked and therefore fairer arena.

.

He would have been better off if he'd simply undocked from Com- Mine Station, launched a few torpedoes at Captain's Fancy, and then fled for his life.

He would have been better off if he'd killed Morn Hyland and ashed her in Bright Beauty's thruster tubes.

In fact, from moment to moment during the next two standard weeks he fully intended to do any one or all of those things.

But he didn't.

Instead, he worked on arranging Nick's destruction.

First, of course, he took care of Bright Beauty.

He had her serviced as thoroughly as possible without major repairs.

He paid for X-ray analysis to test her shell and bulkheads for metal fatigue.

He bought all the new compo- nents he could afford.

And he gave her name and id letters a fresh coat of paint.

At the same time, however, he asked questions whenever he could.

T*HE VARZECA-L SS FO'R Y He paid sums which nearly broke him for information-even for hints.

And finally, guided by those hints, for one brief, glorious moment he succeeded at breaking into the Station's main computer.

Before the computer's security systems forced him to retreat so that his intrusion wouldn't be traced, he pulled as much data as he could.

By some standards, it wasn't much.

Routine files aside, all he gleaned was the codes and routing by which Captain's Fancy talked to the Station's computer network.

In theory, this knowledge was useless to him.

After all, he couldn't get at the physical lines which carried Captain's Fancy's business to the com- puters and back again.

Anything that tampered with the integrity of those lines would register immediately.

And knowledge of the codes and routing was pointless without access to the actual data-stream.

Angus was desperate, however.

In his own opinion, he'd lost his mind.

In self-defense, he put Morn to sleep, so that she wouldn't know about and couldn't interfere with what he did.

Then, hyperventilating so hard that his suit could hardly keep up with it, and sweating like a beast, he went EVA.

He got away with it because it was such an odd thing to do.

People who wanted to work outside their ships did so in the shipyard, over on the other side of Com-Mine.

And only men as suspicious as Angus himself scanned the ships around them while they were in dock.

Apparently Nick Succorso wasn't that suspicious.

Or maybe he had too much confidence in his own invulnerability.

Nobody noticed what Angus was doing.

Clamped to the metal surface with limpets, and keeping his head turned grimly away from the fathomless starfield, he moved along the stag- gering curve of Com-Mine's skin from Bright Beauty to Captain's Fancy.

When he got there, he used a current sensor to read each of the lines connecting the ship to the Station until he identified the one that carried the data-stream.

Then, with savage care, he wrapped a dummy line tightly around it from output to receptacle and ran the dummy back to his ship.

Aboard Bright Beauty again, he didn't give himself time to recover from the ordeal of EVA.

He was obsessed.

His hands shook in eagerness and fear as he sent power down his line, surrounding Captain's Fancy's data- stream with a delicate magnetic field.

Then he put a scope on his line and watched the field for fluctuations.

It worked.

Under full boost, his scope began to show a swift series of spikes and scoops, a fluttering progression too quick for the eye to interpret.

His computer had the codes and routing: now it had an echo of the actual data-stream.

Soon he could call up a display of everything Captain's Fancy and Com-Mine Station said to each other.

Si TLE PAE NR a YDEOBNSAELED SrOiN Under different circumstances, his interest in this information would | have been specific and temporary.

He would have used what he knew to j plunder Nick's finances, transfer to himself everything Nick owned.

It \ wouldn't have been difficult to make that kind of computer transaction un- | traceable, using his own codes and routing.

Then he would have detached his ' dummy line and sat back, daring anyone aboard Captain's Fancy to guess | what had happened.

Now, however, Angus had other plans.

In a sense, the situation was simplified by the fact that Nick didn't have enough money to repair Captain's Fancy.

Despite his successful air, he was no wealthier than Angus.

Without that temptation, Angus had an easier time stifling the impulse to touch or alter anything he found.

He didn't want to warn his enemy of the danger, didn't want to let Nick know he was being stalked.

Instead of tampering with the data-stream, he programmed his com- puter to alert him if any one of a long list of key words and names appeared in the ship-Station dialogue.

As an afterthought, because he was inherently suspicious, he told the computer to do the same if any unidentifiable codes were used.

Then he left Bright Beauty and went about the business of behaving normally.

When he returned to his ship and reviewed what his computer had gleaned, he found no mention of himself or Morn or anything he could recognize.

He learned only that Nick Succorso was faithful about logging in and out of Captain's Fancy.

And Nick had received two messages in a code Angus' computer didn't recognize and couldn't crack.

Angus had no way to read those messages.

But he could trace them because he already knew the routing.

They came from Station Security.

When he discovered that, he wanted to laugh and scream and break something and celebrate all at once.

It was the perfect touch-the final reason why his bluff had worked.

There was in fact a leak in Security, a traitor.

Why else would Nick Succorso be receiving coded messages from that source?

The vacuum-based accusation Angus had prepared to protect his hold on Morn had hit Com-Mine's inspectors where they lived: its blind accuracy had given it an almost prescient credibility.

And Nick Succorso's swashbuckling success was based on inside infor- mation.

He had an ally in Security; a friend in power.

THE REAL STORY Characteristically, Angus didn't worry about why.

He didn't even care about how.

The fact itself was all that interested him.

Nick Succorso had an ally in Security.

That made him more dangerous.

But it also diminished him.

He didn't stand on his own: he was a good face with nothing behind it; empty bravado.

A nerve-juice addict could do everything he did-as long as the junkie had inside information to back him up, a friend in power.

Nick could sneer at anybody he wanted; but it only mattered because he had Security on his side.

"You bastard,"

Angus muttered through his teeth.

"You shit-eating bastard.

I'm going to rip your balls off."

It was just a question of when and where.

S' Tz E* RO ROESN BR 2 BDSORNBALISIDE SSOUN GS, Solefekdreal is dy [3 Fn Di this period-nearly a week-Morn Hyland spent most of her time either catatonic or asleep.

When Angus wanted to use her, he did so without rousing her from the influence of her zone implant.

He didn't want her to know what he was doing: he couldn't take the risk that she might find some way to sabotage him.

For that reason, he got her out of bed only for meals, or to go to Mallorys with him.

Every time he used her body, he hardened his resolve against Nick Succorso.

And every time he took her out in public, the desire to protect her burned as brightly as terror in him.

But the second week was different.

Now Angus timed his trips away from Bright Beauty to coincide with Nick's absences from Captain's Fancy.

And he wore under his shipsuit a nerve beeper, a small electrode taped to the skin and set to tingle whenever Captain's Fancy relayed a summons for Nick through Com-Mine communications, requesting his return to his ship.

Tak- ing Morn with him now to Mallorys was part of Angus' plan, part of the bait.

He wanted to make Nick see her and do something: he wanted to make Nick want her badly enough to take action.

In fact, he almost went so far as to buy her new clothes.

She could be ravishing, if he gave her the chance.

And he ached to do that, for his own sake as well as hers, so that she would be ravishing and his, like Bright Beauty with fresh paint.

TAFEMREALSS TORY But in the end he decided to keep her in her rumpled, ill-fitting shipsuit, not because of the money, but because of the danger.

If she looked too good, she might attract trouble he wasn't ready for.

And there was always the possibility-he took it seriously only because he was too suspicious to do anything else-that Nick was smart enough to smell a trap when it was smothered in perfume.

He wanted Nick to do something because almost anything he did would give Angus an excuse to kill him-and would provide as well a plea of self-defense against any murder charge.

Angus could be ready for almost anything because he knew more about Nick's business and activities than Nick could guess.

And when Nick was gone, Angus would be in an ideal position to make use of what he knew about Station Security.

Nick's ally might become his.

A little leverage, a little blackmail, might make it possible for Angus to live as well as Nick did now.

So he made sure Nick saw Morn as often as possible.

Secretly, cun- ningly, so that no one grasped what he was doing, he flaunted her in front of Nick, urging him, goading him.

At the same time, darkness swirled around in Angus' head and his hands itched for blood because he knew that behind her blank expression, her wounded and necessary emptiness, Morn was on fire for his enemy.

Each time he put her where she and Nick could see each other, he swore to himself, promised, that as soon as he got her back to the ship he was going to rip out her female organs and feed them down the garbage proces- sor, so that no man would ever have any reason to desire her again.

And each time, when they returned to Bright Beauty, he couldn't control the gentleness which came over him.

He flung obscenities at her with his mouth; but his touch was soft, nearly tentative.

The things he made her do were strangely decorous, almost considerate, as if after depriving her of will and hope and humanity he wished her to forgive him.

She tried to hide it, but she couldn't conceal her perplexity.

He knew her too well: he could read the color of her eyes, the small muscles in her cheeks.

She felt the change in him, the distress, and didn't know what it meant.

Gentleness?

From Angus Thermopyle?

She knew him too well.

She watched him as if she could see that he was doomed.

Was she gloating?

He believed she was.

He believed that she already counted on Nick Succorso to rescue her and destroy him.

He believed that she was already measuring out his blood in drops of pain.

The thought made all his limbs knot with the force of his need to tear her apart.

ST ER HEN 2Rub PDSOINFAH DD S-ON !

| ' Yet he didn't hurt her.

She was too precious.

And too perplexed.

Her confusion had implications he couldn't begin to understand.

He wasn't the kind of man who could imagine that she might be reconsidering her hate.

He could never have understood that his fear and gentleness might have touched her in the very place which his abuse had made vulnerable.

Alone in the command module, he had to grind his teeth to keep from howling.

Damn you completely to hell and horror!

What have you done to me?

He told himself he was ready.

He'd been a match for men like Nick Succorso since he was twelve.

And he knew everything he needed about Nick except the content of those coded messages.

He was ready.

Of course he was ready.

But the clenched ache deep down in his gut told him he wasn't ready.

He felt that he was never going to be ready again.

What have you done to me?

He spent all the time his enemy allowed him feverishly trying to break that secret code.

But whenever Nick left Captain's Fancy, Angus also took Morn out of Bright Beauty so that no one would know-so that he himself wouldn't know-how fundamental and compulsory his fear had be- come.

Finally he reached the end of his endurance.

He'd waited and plotted and struggled for a week, and still Nick did nothing.

Angus never doubted that some harm was being planned against him: he simply couldn't bear the suspense any longer.

Any day now, he was going to fall on his knees and beg Morn to pardon him.

And if that happened, he was ruined.

Fear and desperation made him do things that looked brave-or at least foolhardy.

With Morn, he spent an inordinately long time in Mallorys, buying drinks that only tightened the knot in his stomach, glowering ferociously at everyone who addressed him, seething under Nick's gaze and ignoring it.

But when Nick got up to leave with his crew, his retinue, Angus also heaved upright, snarled Morn to his side.

Without much difficulty, he contrived to arrive in the doorway in time to block Nick's way.

In fact, it seemed a little too easy.

Angus' instincts were shrill with alarm.

Nick seemed to want this encounter as much as he did.

But he couldn't back down; not now.

He was too scared.

"After you, Captain Succorso,"

he growled, making no effort to dis- guise his malice.

"I know you're in a hurry."

Nick bowed gracefully, but didn't move.

"On the contrary, Captain THEM ROECA- aS TO R Fi Thermo-pile."

Except for his scars, his expression was bland.

"I'm in no hurry at all.

Please-"

he gestured expansively-"after you."

His gaze and his bow and his gesture were all aimed at Morn.

"Ther-mop-a-lee,"

Angus retorted.

"Ther-mop-a-lee.

Get it right, Suc- corso."

"Really?"

Nick cocked a self-assured eyebrow.

Apparently he liked the situation.

Perhaps it was a kind of stim he especially enjoyed, an adrenaline rush.

"Right here in the door?

Extraordinary.

"You're plotting, Captain Thermo-pile.

You're hatching something.

You've got it in your pocket right now.

Or are you just playing with yourself?

"Why don't you open up about it?

Let someone in to help you."

In one way, Angus seemed to go blind with rage.

Playing?

Playing?

But in another, he'd never been clearer, calmer.

I'll show you who's playing.

He was at his best when he was terrified.

Nick and his retinue-three men, two women-were unarmed; other- wise they wouldn't have been allowed into Mallorys.

But they didn't need needle-lasers or old-fashioned shivs against one man.

And they were ready to fight for their captain, at any time, in any place.

What he'd done to deserve that kind of loyalty, Angus couldn't imagine.

But he didn't doubt that the six of them would relish beating him into the deck-plates.

Outside Mallorys, the wide public passages of DelSec were deserted.

It was the time of day when most people either drank or stayed in their quarters.

Assuming that anybody on Com-Mine Station would have been willing to help Angus in a fight, that help wasn't available now.

He let Nick see him swallow, hesitate.

Then he said, "Let's talk about it outside."

Deliberately he copied Nick's gesture.

"After you."

"No, I insist."

Nick grinned.

"J'm after you."

"The hell you are,"

Angus muttered.

"You don't care about me.

You're after her."

Then he shouldered ahead of Nick through the doorway.

In his pocket, one of his fingers tapped Morn's zone-implant control, sending a spasm through her muscles, a neural storm that looked like vio- lence.

As a result, she blocked the exit behind Nick as if she was on Angus' side and wanted to fight for him.

At the same time, Angus pivoted on Nick, grabbed him by his ship- suit, and slung him like a duffel bag around and against the wall.

Surprise and strength gave him all the advantage he needed.

With the back of his hand, he struck Nick across the side of his head-a blow that cracked and echoed in the passage like a rivet shearing under stress.

The blow made Nick crumple; but Angus held him up and struck him again.

Then he was out of time.

STEPH GN &R S sD2OUNDAL D SON Nick's retinue burst out of Mallorys, knocking Morn to the deck.

"

They were hot for blood.

Angus faced them as if he were calm.

With his hands, he dangled _ Nick's unconscious form in front of them.

His fingers were wrapped around  their captain's neck.

"Go fucking back inside."

His voice sounded like an amiable mine- hammer.

"Leave me fucking alone.

I'm not fucking done with him."

For a second, Nick's crew faltered, chagrin on their faces.

Then the two women jerked Morn up from the deck and clamped hands to her windpipe.

Morn continued thrashing.

Now she looked like she was seriously fighting for her life.

Her eyes took in everything; she understood how Angus was using her.

But she couldn't stop her struggles.

"Standoff,"

a man said.

"You kill him, we kill her."

The danger wrenched Angus' heart.

The need to remain still was so acute it nearly broke him.

He wanted to drop Nick and charge at the women, hit and crush everybody who stood in his way, everybody who threatened Morn.

But that would be suicide.

He couldn't beat all five of them before one of them got him.

Or Morn.

Somehow, he stood where he was and pretended he didn't care.

"You've got it wrong.

You kill her, I kill him.

I don't want him dead.

I'm just protecting myself.

Shits like you like six-to-one odds.

I don't."

Abruptly he roared with all the force of his rage, "Put her fucking down!"

They obeyed.

They wanted to save Nick.

And-Angus guessed-they didn't want the responsibility of killing the woman Nick desired.

They let go of Morn and backed away.

She dropped convulsively to the deck.

While he was still wrestling with his wish to attack them all, Angus' nerve-beeper tingled, warning him that Captain's Fancy had sent out a call for Nick Succorso.

He didn't hesitate.

If what he'd just done didn't provoke some action, nothing would.

Carelessly he opened his fists and let Nick fall.

With the efficiency of long practice, he keyed the commands on the zone implant control which brought Morn back to her feet, restored her control of her limbs.

Then he released her.

The way her gaze sprang involuntarily to Nick's sprawled form hurt him worse than anything Nick could have done in a fight.

But Captain's Fancy's crew ignored her now.

They didn't try to stop i Het Ree A LFS a Ok  Ame Angus from leaving.

Surely they had their own beepers.

And their captain needed them.

Without interference, Angus returned Morn to Bright Beauty and sealed the hatches.

This time he was determined to do her serious harm.

The blows he'd already struck flamed in his arm, burning for repetition.

Violence made him hungry for more.

He meant to damage her, needed to damage her.

She deserved it.

But first he checked the computer monitoring Captain's Fancy's Sta- tion communications.

He wanted to know why Nick was being summoned.

The explanation was in code.

Captain's Fancy had received one of those messages from Security and immediately requested Nick Succorso's return to his ship.

Cursing as foully as he knew how, Angus Thermopyle abandoned his purpose against Morn Hyland.

Something was about to happen.

His instincts were shouting at him, yelling at him to leave, go at once, escape before Nick could take revenge.

But he ignored that warning.

There was no way to leave; he was already committed.

He ordered Morn to her g-seat, ordered her to strap herself in.

Then he keyed his monitor to display current data from Captain's Fancy.

He knew it when Nick got aboard.

After that, for some reason Captain' s Fancy cleared all channels and stopped talking to Station.

Because his instincts clamored like Klaxons, Angus snapped at Morn, "Warm up.

Get ready.

I think we're going somewhere."

She obeyed the way he liked: correctly, without question or delay.

Bright Beauty's systems came alive.

Function lights winked awake on his console.

Checklists and verifications flickered across the screens.

Scanners started to feed running data into the computers: automatic navigational in- put from Station; information about the presence and movements of ships in Com-Mine Station's control space.

While Morn worked, Angus concentrated on Captain's Fancy.

What was Nick doing?

Getting ready.

Of course.

Getting ready to leave.

But why?

Because Security had told him something.

What?

Angus sucked his upper lip.

What had Security told Nick Succorso?

His boards and screens cleared.

Bright Beauty was prepared to go.

SiTSE'P H&E N GRY SDROPNSAGL ID'S *OIN | Morn sat still, staring at nothing, her hands resting on her console so they could do whatever he told her quickly.

Indecision paralyzed him.

He didn't know how to go against his in- stincts.

They'd saved him too often.

If he didn't listen to them, he was lost.

He felt the pain; but until he tasted blood, he didn't realize he'd bitten into his lip.

Muttering obscenities automatically, as if they no longer had any meaning, he disconnected his ship from the dummy line which fed him Captain's Fancy's data-stream.

Bright Beauty's communication systems crackled awake.

Like every receiver in and around Com-Mine Station, his gear caught the codes and frequencies of a distress call.

Immediately his speakers broadcast the call.

It froze him in his seat.

One part of his mind went completely blank with surprise and alarm as the incoming supply ship from Earth cried for help.

Navigational computer wrecked.

Somebody on the crew crazy with gap- sickness.

Coordinates lost.

Control lost.

Crisis urgent.

Triangulate and pur- sue.

Distressdistressdis- But the rest of him was thinking furiously.

Incoming supply ship.

The richest treasure this side of an asteroid full of pure cesium.

And it was weeks early.

Probably a trick to protect it from pirates.

That was what Security was talking to Nick Succorso about.

Telling him the ship would be early.

So he would have a clear shot at it.

The change of schedule would backfire.

The ship wouldn't be expecting his attack.

But nobody could have predicted this emergency.

Any second now, Station was going to slap a curfew on the docks, forbidding anyone to leave- making it a life offense for anyone to leave-until an official rescue mission could be organized.

If he didn't move fast, Nick would lose his chance- With his heart triphammering and a rush of sweat soaking his ship- suit, Angus snapped into action.

The distress call went dead only a few seconds later.

Apparently the damage to the navigational computer had spread to communications.

But by that time he'd already dropped all his lines and uncoupled from Station.

By some definitions, he was no longer in dock; he still had to obey Center, but he wasn't legally bound by Security.

His scan told him Captain's Fancy was doing the same.

Station took a different view of the situation, of course.

Center wanted absolute command over every ship in its control space; Security wanted authority over any rescue or salvage.

Angus' receivers picked up a burst of static; the orders blared in his ears.

THE REAL STORY "Bright Beauty, this is Station Center.

You must redock.

An emer- gency has been declared.

Emergency procedures are in force.

You may not depart.

"If you ignore this instruction"

-Angus heard satisfaction in the me- tallic voice-'"we will be forced to consider you illegal.

You will be fired upon."

Typical authoritarian attitude-arrogant and unjustified.

Like the UMC cops and Security, Station Center was in love with muscle.

Unfortu- nately, that didn't change anything.

Angus would still die when the Station started shooting.

Captain's Fancy must have received the same orders.

Nick ignored them.

Blithely, as if she were deaf or invulnerable, his ship pivoted into her normal escape attitude for departure; under easy thrust, she ran out a few dozen kilometers from Station-directly into prime range for Com-Mine's cannon.

She waited for the first warning shots to be fired.

Then she winked off Angus' screens; disappeared as completely as if she'd ceased to exist.

He watched and swore, helpless to stop her.

At the same time, however, he didn't let anything interfere with his own actions.

Bright Beauty was already in her escape attitude, and he was pulling her out from the Station with all the thrust she was known to have.

The shit-eaters in Center had that one chance to kill him, but they missed it.

As required by law, they sent their first shots across his trajectory, to warn him.

At once, he fed stutter into his drive and started transmitting his own distress call.

There's a short somewhere.

Smoke.

Controls locked-I can't navigate.

Don't shoot.

I'm trying to come around.

That froze Center.

They didn't have any choice: they had to wait to see whether he was telling the truth.

While his call went out, he growled to Morn, "Brace yourself.

This is going to hurt."

Steeling himself in his g-seat, he engaged Bright Beauty's power boost- ers.

After that, Com-Mine's guns couldn't track him.

He wasn't literally moving too fast for their capabilities: he was simply moving faster than any- one could believe.

Surely his ship wasn't built for that kind of acceleration?

By the time Center adjusted its preconceptions-and its targ programming -Bright Beauty was out of range.

Angus and Morn were unconscious, of course.

The stress was too STEP FA EN gk 2 DOING D SON much to sustain.

But the ship's boosters cut off after a preset interval, reduc- jing g to more tolerable levels; and in the meantime, Bright Beauty's auto- : matic helm set her course by tracing the supply ship's distress call back along } its transmission vector.

Angus recovered first.

He stayed where he was, however, breathing | deeply and trying to clear his head.

Made it.

Once again, his ship had saved | him.

Hurt as she was, she was his.

If he had to, he would make the entire ' Station pay for the damage done to her.

No one was allowed to harm any- thing his.

A short time later, Morn twitched, groaned, lifted her head.

Uncon- sciousness and the strain of g took a moment to fade from her eyes.

Then, without hesitation, she put her hands on her console and started tapping in instructions.

He was too stunned and relieved; and too much time had passed: he'd forgotten the danger.

He wasn't looking at his own console, so he didn't see the blip which began to flash as soon as she set to work.

Luckily, he glanced over at her and saw the look of rapture on her face.

That look was unmistakable.

The whole inside of my head was different.

I was floating, and every- thing was clear.

It was like the universe spoke to me.

In sudden panic, he slapped at his console, identified the alert.

She was trying to feed a self-destruct sequence into Bright Beauty's engines.

Bitch.

Fucking daughter of a fucking whore.

Gap-sickness.

He was too tired to swear at her aloud.

The thought of her illness made him weary and slightly nauseous.

A strange burning sensation filled his eyes.

He should have gone over to her and hit her, of course, should have pounded her back into her right mind.

But he was too tired for that.

And anyway, Bright Beauty was running under spin.

Sighing as if he were sad, he activated the zone-implant control.

Morn's hands fell off the console, and she slumped in her g-seat.

That was necessary; he had to do it.

When he engaged Captain's Fancy, he couldn't take the risk that she might interfere somehow, hamper or weaken him.

There was no reason why he shouldn't switch her off like a robot with its power supply cut.

THE REAL STORY And yet he felt about her gap-sickness the same way he felt about Bright Beauty's wounded side.

Somebody was going to pay for it.

He would get even with the entire parsec if he had to.

In the meantime, however, he had to take care of himself.

He was confident that the place where the supply ship stopped transmitting was at least half a day away under strong thrust: ships crossing the gap were required to reenter normal space that far from any station, to minimize the chance of an accident.

And his scanners would warn him as soon as he crossed the supply ship's particle trail.

So he had time for some food and a little rest.

If he weren't at his best, he might not be able to beat Captain's Fancy.

He was relying on surprise.

Nick Succorso couldn't know his data- stream had been tapped.

And he couldn't know Bright Beauty had been able to get away from Com-Mine Station.

He couldn't know Angus Thermopyle had no interest at all in the supply ship.

Without gap capability, Bright Beauty lacked Captain's Fancy's ability to leave Com-Mine and the belt for some other star system or station, some- place where she wasn't known.

For that reason, Angus couldn't risk an attack on the supply ship.

If he found her, he would be forced to rescue her crew and salvage her cargo in the legally prescribed manner.

DelSec lived on those supplies as much as the rest of Station did.

If he pirated them-and DelSec was given any reason of any kind to believe he'd done it-he would be murdered the next time he set foot in Mallorys.

No, Angus was after Nick himself.

What he wanted was to catch Nick gutting the lost ship.

If he could do that, all his options were good-as long as he destroyed Captain's Fancy.

He could rescue the crew (if Nick had left any of them alive); keep as much of the cargo as he wanted for himself ("lost in combat"); salvage the rest; go back to Com-Mine like a hero.

His instincts assured him.

this was the wrong thing to do.

He ignored them.

First he stopped Bright Beauty's spin and went to get himself a quick meal.

Then he returned to his g-seat and began testing all his sensors and sifters and sniffers to make sure they were in proper tune.

Whenever he chewed on his upper lip, he tasted blood again.

SiTC ERAS EAN SR, aDEOINSAGL DEST OIN erin pas | 4 Fn hree hours sooner than Angus was expect- ing, the alarm linked to his tracking gear chimed.

He grunted in surprise.

It was too soon.

The supply ship should never have crossed back into normal space this close to the Station.

And that wasn't all.

Ignoring g, he hauled Bright Beauty around and dropped spin to improve his scan.

The particle trace didn't look right.

Big haulers like supply ships had throatier engines: they left a wider track across the dark, more garbage at the fringes and more complete dispersion in the core.

Studying his displays and readouts made him so suspicious that he felt like throwing up.

And yet- The sheer coincidence of another ship having passed directly across the supply ship's transmission vector was staggering.

And if this was the supply ship's trace, he was much closer to her than he'd anticipated.

She was closer to Com-Mine; therefore her distress call had taken less time to reach Station; therefore she'd had less time to blunder away from this spot; therefore he could catch up with her more easily.

And by rights Nick's departure from Station should have taken him well past this point.

It was virtually impossible to cut a blink crossing this short.

Which meant he was already out where the ship should be.

If the ship THAEVROEA LAS FOR Y.

was there, Angus might not be able to catch him in time.

But if the ship was here- If the ship was here, Angus could get to her first.

Nick would have to come back looking for her.

The perfect situation for an ambush.

Angus' dilemma was terrifying.

If he guessed wrong, he would lose his only chance to take Captain's Fancy by surprise.

Then he would have to live with the consequences of his earlier attack on Nick.

And Nick had Security on his side.

He had a newer ship.

He had an entire crew to back him up.

Angus might be forced to hide out in the belt for years.

His sweat made him stink like a swine.

Nevertheless he knew exactly what to do.

Focusing scan back along the trace, he went looking for the characteristic burst of radiation and dimensional emission which accompa- nied every crossing from the gap into normal space.

Before long, he found it.

There: the supply ship had entered normal space right there.

She was too much of everything-too soon, too close, too easily crippled; her trace was too narrow.

But she was there, where he could get to her hours ahead of his enemy.

Giving Bright Beauty as much boost as he could stomach, he reversed course and followed the trace.

When he plotted the ship's speed from the density of the particle trail, he saw she was decelerating slowly.

That made sense.

Unable to navi- gate, she would naturally want to reduce her own momentum so she would be easier to catch and board.

Instead of pushing ahead, however, he began to cut his own speed correspondingly.

He didn't want the supply ship to know he'd found her.

She might try to beacon him-and that might betray his position.

He intended to sneak up on her, hovering just outside normal scan range and playing dead so he wouldn't show up on Captain's Fancy's instru- ments.

He even went so far as to ride straight down the center of the supply ship's trace, confusing it with Bright Beauty's to hide himself.

He would wait until Nick came.

He would wait until Captain's Fancy cut the supply ship's heart out, eliminated embarrassing witnesses, arranged easy access to the cargo.

He would wait until Nick docked with the supply ship's carcass.

Then he would rip Nick Succorso and everything that bastard loved down to raw electrons and space dust.

He intended to release Morn Hyland so she could watch.

He would let her see the blast and try to guess which piece of incinerated debris repre- sented the man she wanted instead of him.

STEP HG NER A ADSOINTARL DS(ON After that-if she was lucky-he would strip off her shipsuit and _ make her do things that sickened her.

He would teach her who owned her - until she was in no danger of ever forgetting it.

If she wasn't lucky, he might do a little surgery on her, rearrange parts of her body somewhat, just for fun.

First, however, he had to find the supply ship.

He didn't understand it: she kept slowing and slowing-and yet she remained out of scan-range, invisible somewhere ahead of him.

At her pres- ent rate of deceleration, he should be almost on top of her by now.

Yet he couldn't locate her.

That was impossible.

He knew for a fact that his equipment was capable of tracking down one lost EVA suit in a hundred thousand cubic kilometers of black emptiness.

The supply ship couldn't hide from him, even if she had a reason to try, which of course she didn't because she was dead unless somebody came to her rescue, she had to be here somewhere, had to be- When he found the explanation, it stunned him for a few seconds.

That much delay nearly killed him.

Ahead of Bright Beauty, a sudden powerful roar along the trace showed that the ship he was following had cut in full thrust, enough sheer power to pull away from him at an acceleration of several g.

Which was why he hadn't caught up with her.

She'd been piling up speed while he'd been slowing down.

But that was crazy.

No crippled supply ship would do something like that.

A crippled supply ship with runaway thrusters would jettison her en- gines rather than let herself race out of reach of help.

Therefore the ship he followed wasn't a crippled supply ship.

He'd been tricked.

There was no supply ship.

The distress call was a ruse.

He'd set out intending to spring an ambush, but the ambush had been sprung on him, he was already caught- Stunned, he stared at his readouts and displays, and for a moment he didn't move.

The extent to which he'd been duped paralyzed him.

What chance did he have against people who could do this?

He'd been so thor- oughly outmaneuvered that he was as good as dead.

Gaping dismay, he looked over at Morn.

She hadn't moved, of course.

The zone implant blocked the neural impulses which connected her mind to her body.

She was conscious, but helpless.

Like his ship.

Unless he could find a way to save them, they would both be destroyed.

A howl rose in his throat; but he had no time for it.

Be Ora BirvceALE ORY aT?

Bright Beauty had been running without spin.

And all his attention had been focused on the particle trace.

He hauled her into a turn, bringing sensors and sniffers to bear on her blind spot.

At once, her Klaxons went off, wailing like the damned.

A ship came at him fast.

No, worse than that: the ship had already fired, throwing a flight of torpedoes in his direction at terrible speed.

His terror was absolute: it made him superhuman.

Bright Beauty was still turning, still starting into spin.

He gathered boost and unleashed it at an angle, kicked her to the side so hard that she tumbled away as if she were totally out of control, wheeling like a derelict.

Every alarm she had on her seemed to go off simultaneously.

She wasn't made for stress like that.

Damaged as she was, she was in danger of breaking apart.

But the torpedoes missed.

Under so much g, he should have gone completely blank; crushed unconscious in his seat.

It should have been impossible for him to retain any sense of orientation, of the spatial relationship between himself and his at- tacker.

Nevertheless, while Bright Beauty tumbled, he opened fire.

The spray of his matter cannon went miraculously close to the other ship.

She was forced to veer off.

He had no way of identifying his attacker, but she was almost cer- tainly the ship he'd been following-almost certainly Captain's Fancy.

Somehow, Nick Succorso had been able to cut his blink crossing short enough to intersect the transmission vector of the bogus distress call.

Or he'd blinked far enough past that point to return with another crossing.

He'd lured Angus to follow him.

Then, when he'd slowed Angus nearly to a stand- still, he'd accelerated and looped back to attack.

None of that mattered, of course.

It didn't matter who Angus' enemy was-not now.

The only thing that mattered was that he was trapped and had to fight for his life.

For his life and Bright Beauty's.

And Morn's.

His ship's tumble was dangerous.

It was also much too slow.

Under this kind of g, he couldn't read his screens.

Still he knew somehow what the other ship was doing, where she was in relation to him.

As his attacker came around and brought her guns to bear, he hit braking thrust, straightened out Bright Beauty's fall, got her tubes behind her, and gave her as much drive as he thought he could stand- without losing his mind to the dark.

Matter fire licked her sides, but didn't do any real damage.

Then she S 7T-E PAE N:2R 3 JDSORNSARL DSS ON pulled out of range, surprising her attacker with the fact that she was still : ih control and could perform maneuvers which should have been impossi- | ble.

Angus' head was jammed brutally against his g-seat; but now at least | he could look at his displays and screens, his console.

Targ plotted the other | ship automatically, showing her on a grid even a crazy could have understood.

She was gaining on him.

At this rate, she would be in position to open fire in a matter of seconds.

Angus ought to be taking evasive action.

But he already knew Captain's Fancy was fast.

If he really wanted to outrun her, he would have to give Bright Beauty all the power his drive could generate.

Then he would black out.

He wouldn't know whether he was alive or dead until his ship reached the end of her fuel and stopped accelerating.

He didn't pile on any more boost.

He also didn't take any evasive action.

To do that, he would have to slow down; or else the inertial stress might be enough to make him hemor- rhage.

Instead he started seeding the space behind him with static-mines.

He didn't know it, but his mouth and chin were covered with blood.

Every time he bit his upper lip, it bled more.

Static-mines were tiny: a scan officer with his mind on other things might miss them.

Angus released them in clusters of ten or twelve, but they scattered so quickly that they shouldn't create a combined blip for the attack- ing ship to read.

If she fired at him and hit one- Or if she simply ran into it- She fired.

His displays showed him the characteristic energy-burst of matter cannon.

Bright Beauty was struck-another scar along her flank.

Yet she was lucky: the hurt was no worse than a slap.

The salvo also caught a few of the static-mines.

He'd keyed them to set each other off.

In seconds, his trail was cov- ered by disruptive explosions, a barrage of particle noise, doppler signals, and radio garbage loud enough to randomize every scanner Captain's Fancy had.

In effect, Bright Beauty-and space itself-disappeared.

The attack- ing ship was left deaf and blind.

She would stay that way for ten or fifteen seconds, until her com- puters were able to filter the chaos, distinguish between noise and fact.

At that instant, Angus wrenched Bright Beauty to the side, away from her former course.

He gave her one quick slam of extra boost.

Then he shut her down.

T HEU RIECA_E SS TO R'Y.

Everything.

Even life-support.

Thrust; communication; lights; sen- sors: everything except minimal computer function and passive scan systems which didn't give out signs of life; everything except the faint, almost unde- tectable nuclear hum of charged matter cannon.

He was trying to make himself invisible.

Trying to compensate for the fact that he was outgunned and out- manned and probably outpowered.

_ Sweat drenched his shipsuit, but he didn't notice that.

He forgot to curse; he almost refused to breathe because in his imagination he could taste his air already starting to go bad.

His whole body was focused on the dull screens of his passive scan-sifters which sent out nothing, but only accepted and interpreted what came to them across the void.

Where was his attacker?

By rights, his sense of space told him, she should be there.

But his equipment said nothing.

He was as blind as Captain's Fancy.

The only difference, the only hope, was that Captain's Fancy was the one in pursuit, that- The only difference was that she was still moving under power.

His screens flickered.

There.

Moving cautiously now, hunting, groping-but still using her engines, life-support, internal communications; still sending a shout of data through the residual noise left by the static-mines.

Because she didn't know where he was, she was about to come under his guns.

Come on, you bastards.

He didn't so much as whisper aloud: he was irrationally afraid his attacker might hear him.

Come on, you sons of whores.

Let me have just one good shot at you.

Just one.

His ship made no sound, gave away nothing except the small hum of her guns.

Surely the only way Nick could spot her was by picking out her silhouette against the starfield?

And surely they were far enough away from each other to make that difficult, nearly impossible?

Surely it would take time for the computers to run that kind of analysis on what they saw?

Time: all Angus needed was time.

His attacker was already within range.

If he fired now, he wouldn't miss.

But he might not kill her.

If he waited until she came closer, he would have a chance to catch her with a torpedo.

Just one torpedo would be enough to break her back.

He was sure of that.

He knew what his torpedos could do.

: He waited.

Come on, you shithead motherfucking cocksuckers.

ST EP AEN ERS FDEOINSAMAD SS*OIN Waited.

Too late, his equipment registered the sudden blast of power as the other ship fed boost to her thrusters.

She'd spotted him.

Just when he was about to gut her, tear her en- tirely to pieces, she'd spotted him.

Or she'd guessed what he was doing.

With all her strength, she accelerated out of his way.

Raging, he jabbed at his guns, sent cannon fire like hate at her, hot and savage, frantic for destruction.

One entire barrage got her, skimming open the metal skin of her side, spilling atmosphere and debris into the vacuum.

But that wasn't enough to kill her.

He knew it wasn't enough because she kept returning his fire until she pulled out of range.

And she hit him.

He didn't have time to assess the damage: he had to get moving, had to get Bright Beauty under thrust before his attacker could turn.

Fiercely, he brought her back to life, ignited her engines.

He knew his ship.

She was Ais, and he'd taken care of her intimately for years.

When his thrusters roared alive, he knew instantly that one of them had been hurt.

It stuttered and choked, sending a terrible shudder through the hull.

That last hit had holed one of his thruster tubes.

The side-blast would make Bright Beauty almost impossible to con- trol.

He tried: brutally, desperately, he tried.

Ignoring the strain on his body, his heart, the strain on Morn, the strain on every suture of Bright Beauty's skin and every weld of her frame, he fought for speed and control, wrestled with the side-blast for his life.

It was no good.

He couldn't do it.

It would have taken all his skill just to run her in a straight line at a limp.

While his attacker turned and scanned him and studied the situation and then started back toward him to finish him off, he accomplished nothing except a wild cartwheel into the dark, an off- center spin that made Bright Beauty completely unmanageable.

Now if he tried for speed the only thing he would do was rip his own mind away so that he would be unconscious when he died.

He didn't know what to do.

He didn't know how to fail and die, but that was his only alternative.

While Bright Beauty reeled out of control like this, he couldn't so much as fire his guns.

They were useless.

And he knew his enemy was closing on him, knew it without a glance at scan-which was hopelessly confused in any case.

By the time he succeeded at pulling his ship out of her spin, Nick Succorso would be ready to blast him to dust.

DVEVIRCECA LAST .

R_Y: -- ' Only because Bright Beauty's motion was so painful, he struggled with .

it.

He shut down the engine with the damaged tube, then used braking against the spin.

But when her screens cleared, he saw that he'd done noth- ing except make life easier for his enemy.

The other ship was in position: poised; primed.

For the second time, he found himself staring down the pitiless gullet of enemy cannon.

The sight made him want to weep.

There was nothing he could do.

All his anger and inspiration were gone, expended.

His attacker was within range now, but it wasn't worth the trouble to fire at her.

He might be able to scar her a little, that was all.

A few scars wouldn't prevent her from eviscerating him and his ship and everything he'd ever wanted.

Abruptly, a communication channel crackled.

"Captain Thermo-pile."

Nick Succorso.

Of course.

"You're beaten.

Remember that.

I warned you."

Angus had the distinct impression Nick was laughing at him.

Without another shot, Captain's Fancy shifted course and started to pull away.

He couldn't believe it.

He stared at his displays, his readouts.

His cameras couldn't see far enough to be sure; but all his sensors agreed with each other.

Captain's Fancy had turned her back on him.

With taunting ease, she ran out of his reach almost immediately.

He was left alone and damaged.

He felt like he'd been marooned.

For the second time, he had no idea why he was alive.

S.LE P ALE N gk ADsOUN et DiS ON iar id ok x, ON TFIn Be Beauty's life-support didn't seem to be working well enough.

His mouth was full of sand.

The whole inside of his head was a desert.

You're beaten.

He wasn't angry anymore.

Remember that.

He didn't have any hope.

J warned you.

Something had been taken away from him-something he needed and couldn't define and didn't know how to live without.

His ship was crippled.

He'd been gone from Com-Mine Station for less than twelve hours, but he would be lucky to get back in thirty-six.

Morn Hyland still slumped in her g-seat, deaf and blind to everything.

He couldn't afford to have Bright Beauty fixed.

If he reached Com- Mine in one piece, that would be as far as he went.

He couldn't make any money without using her, and she was in no condition to be used.

He was trapped; there was no escape.

He might as well have been marooned- It was Morn's fault, of course.

None of this would have happened to him-or to his ship-if she hadn't conceived a passion for Nick Succorso.

And yet he wasn't angry.

He wanted to be angry.

If he could get angry, maybe he would be able to think of something.

After staring at his screens for a long time, he keyed the parallel control to Morn's zone implant and let her have her body back.

Trying to be angry, he didn't look at her.

Instead, he let his hurt, 7 hire VReeA LS PO: RY.

numb thoughts wander to the question of how much she remembered, how much she knew about what had happened.

She'd been in the grip of her gap- sick vision, the message from the universe commanding self-destruction, when he activated her zone implant.

Had she been lost in mad clarity all this time?

Was she still sick?

Or had she been capable of seeing, absorbing, understanding?

She twisted against her seat, stretched her muscles, studied her con- sole and the displays.

Involuntarily he turned to watch her.

Her features were pale and concentrated.

Then, by degrees, horror crept into her face-the horror he recognized.

In a stark and absolute whisper, she asked, "Did I do that?"

He should have let her believe she was responsible.

That would be worse than anything physical he could do to her.

She was horrified of him, of course, revolted to the core and helpless; but to fear herself like that, to be revolted again at herself like that, to be helpless against her own destructive- ness-that would be worse.

It would be as bad as what he'd been striving for until the moment when she and Nick first saw each other-as bad as finding in herself the knowledge that she needed what he did to her and loved it.

She deserved to believe she was responsible.

He couldn't do it; he had no idea why.

Part of his brain was still planning what he would say to pin the blame on her as he replied, "Succorso got us.

A trap-there was no supply ship.

You can see the damage."

Her console would give her all the details she needed.

For several moments she didn't say anything.

Her relief was so strong that she seemed unable to think.

But then, slowly, she began to frown.

Keeping her voice neutral, she asked, ""Why are we still alive?"

Angus shrugged as if he were the one who was helpless.

"He let us go."

She had to consider that for a while: even in her condition, she could see it didn't make sense.

Nick attacked because he wanted to kill Angus.

Then why did he leave Bright Beauty alive?

He set his trap so that he could rescue Morn.

Then why didn't he?

Why did he risk killing her?

Nevertheless something made sense to her; Angus could read her expression well enough to know it when she reached a conclusion.

Carefully she cleared her throat and said, "You're beaten."

Oh, yes.

"He beat you."

Yes, : "You'll be lucky if you can make this thing crawl back to Station."

The words were fierce, almost vindictive; she might have been gloat- ST E Peo EXN?

Rs DsOaN Ail DSO N | ing.

But she didn't sound that way.

Her tone was too flat, too well-controlled.

| If anything, she sounded a little sad, as if she, too, had been hurt in some \ way.

Trying to be angry, he growled, "'Proud of him, aren't you.

You think | that fucker's some kind of hero.

Beat me.

You're counting the minutes until ' you two"-he had no words strong enough '"'-until you can screw him."

Abruptly, she licked her lips; she appeared to have trouble swallowing.

_ "Angus."

She'd never used his name before.

"Angus, listen to me.

"T can save you."

He thought his heart was going to stop beating.

"Tl testify for you.

When you go back to Com-Mine, they'll charge you with illegal departure.

I'll support you.

I'm not much of a cop anymore, but I've still got my id tag.

I'll tell them you left on my orders.

And I'll tell them there was no supply ship.

It was a hoax-that other ship set it up.

I'll tell them to arrest Nick Succorso.

I can't save your ship, but I can save you."

Tell them?

Turn on Nick Succorso?

Give up that piece of meat for me?

Impossible.

Angus felt sure he was losing his mind.

For me?

"Just give me the control."

Her voice was husky, full of need.

"The zone-implant control."

Then he understood.

Shit, how he wished he could be angry!

She wanted the control.

It wasn't for him.

Nothing was for him.

She wanted all that power for herself.

Power over herself{-power to be whatever she wanted.

No gap-sickness.

No fear: immune to fear.

And no consequences for all the harm he'd done her.

The perfect cop.

The perfect lover.

As close as human flesh could come to immortality.

He'd broken her in ways he hadn't anticipated.

Her damage was as profound as Bright Beauty's.

He had trouble seeing.

His eyes ran and wouldn't stop.

"You're crazy,"

he rasped as if he were weeping.

"That's as illegal as what I did to you.

You're a cop.

Your whole family will be discredited, heroic Captain Davies Hyland and his reputation shot to hell."

She reacted bitterly.

"What does that matter?"

she retorted.

"They're dead."

Angus tried a different tack.

"You aren't thinking straight.

You're a cop.

It's worse when a cop breaks the law.

They'll crucify you.

Mandatory death penalty.

They'll find out.

They have to find out.

And then you'll be finished."

Behind his tears, he could see her in lockup; see her waiting to be executed, vaporized.

As precious as Bright Beauty.

"T'll lose my ship."

T HPEV@RIETA EL aS FO RY "You can't save it,"

she shot back, suddenly angry, more than a little desperate.

"I can handle Station Security.

And the UMCP.

I'll think of a way.

But nothing can save your ship.

It's too badly broken.

We'll need a miracle just to get back to Com-Mine alive.

"Please.

Give me the control.""

Now she was pleading nakedly.

"I'm not going to use it against you.

I need it to heal."

He tried to clear his vision.

Softly he said, "And give up my ship.

That's the deal, isn't it.

You'll save me.

If I let you have the control.

But I have to give up my ship."

My life.

She nodded.

After a moment, she replied, "What else have you got to bargain with?"

.

At last, something like his old energy came back to him.

Roughly he undid the straps and pushed his bulk out of his g-seat.

He needed to be angry at her one last time, needed to hate her the way he'd always hated her, the way he hated everyone.

He went toward her.

Clamping one hand on the armrest of her seat, bracing his feet on the deck, he struck her a blow like the one which had felled Nick, a blow with the whole weight of his existence behind it.

If her seat hadn't absorbed some of the impact, she might have been knocked unconscious.

He might have broken her neck.

"Bitch.

I'll never give up my ship.".

Red welled in her cheek; blood trickled from the cuts of her teeth inside her mouth.

Pain and shock glazed her eyes: for a moment, she couldn't focus them.

But she made no effort to defend herself.

If he wanted to hit her again, she was there.

He couldn't do it.

It was like hurting Bright Beauty.

She was too beautiful.

The stark red line of blood across her fine skin wrung his heart.

He needed rage and violence, but they were gone.

"Now you listen to me,"

he panted as if he were groaning.

"It's impossible.

You couldn't get away with it.

"Maybe you can get them to believe you ordered me to violate Cen- ter's orders so you could come out here after Succorso.

But they won't believe anything else unless you file charges.

If you don't, your credibility's gone.

Then you're in the same shit I am.

Only you'll be suspect for destroying Starmaster.

If they find evidence of self-destruct, you'll be court-martialed.

They'll find the zone implant and the control, and then you're dead.

"You'll have to file charges.

S'T-E'P HAE N SRM PDEOANEARLEDSScOEN "But if you do that, you'll have to give them my datacore.

Otherwise ' you don't have any evidence."

He could survive that-he could retain his life, if not his freedom-but she didn't know that.

And he had a horror of lockup.

Imprisonment alone might be enough to ruin him.

"You'll end up killing me.

"And if you do all that, they'll still find the implant and the control.

"Think about it.

After what you've been through, they're going to give you a physical.

They're going to insist on it.

If you resist, they'll get Suspicious-they''ll force it on you.

No matter what you do, you're dead.

"You're going to have to play this out the way it is.

"I'm trying to save your life too."

Now he wasn't able to meet her dull, smoldering gaze.

Slowly he pushed back to his seat.

He strapped himself in.

His movements were abrupt, jerky, as if he didn't have them entirely under control; as if he could have used a zone implant himself.

"We've got a holed thruster tube,"

he muttered.

"It'll take everything I can do just to make her run in a straight line.

You'll have to handle every- thing else."

Glowering like one of the lost, he routed most of his command func- tions to her console.

Then he concentrated all the determination he had left on making Bright Beauty go where he wanted.

He knew Morn would do her part.

What choice did she have?

But he also knew what he'd done to her.

He'd destroyed her last hope.

And he'd hit her again, after all his gentleness; after his gentleness had almost persuaded her he could be reached.

He understood the consequences.

Now she had no choice but to help destroy him.

Rea eRe eA cers sl, ORLY.

iiewte Ht 4 oa .

de Ei ea a L6 a __-_N Fn wo days and more after her departure, Bright Beauty sputtered back into dock at Com-Mine Station.

The trip was harder and longer than Angus had anticipated.

For the first time since Morn started crewing for him, he needed drugs to stay alert.

In fact, she accepted stim herself.

The chore of maintaining the ship while he navigated wasn't exhausting, but his refusal to stop for rest wore her down.

She had a hot glitter in her eyes and a feverish patch of color on each cheek as he settled Bright Beauty into the berth Center assigned; she looked like a woman whose life was on the line.

He noticed that.

Despite his own fatigue and the muzzy-headedness of drugs, he noticed everything about her.

She needed sleep.

If he could have let her have it, he would have.

Unfortunately, there were Station inspectors pounding at his hatches.

He'd ignored an order of curfew to go off after Captain's Fancy.

And the supply ship was still missing.

The official search hadn't found anything.

And Captain's Fancy hadn't returned.

A board of inquiry wanted to ask Angus Thermopyle questions.

Until he answered them, he was effectively under arrest.

He couldn't afford sleep.

And he couldn't afford to let Morn sleep.

He needed her to back him up again.

THE REAL STORY He keyed off his console and got out of his g-seat, swearing uselessly at the force of Station gravity.

"Shut her down,"

he told Morn.

""We're going to be here for a while."

Then he added, "Don't say anything.

I'll handle the fucking inspectors.

You just sit there and do your best to look like a cop."

She nodded once, tightly.

With her hands on the console, she got to work rigging Bright Beauty for rest.

Angus was afraid he would never be able to warm his ship up again.

But even that fear was good for something.

Relying on it because he had so little anger or strength, he went to let the inspectors aboard.

They had a lot to say to him: they made a number of demands.

For once, what he told them came close to the exact truth.

I don't give a shit about the supply ship.

I was after Nick Succorso.

Really?

A treasure like that-just waiting to be looted?

Do you expect us to believe that, Captain Thermopyle?

Do you think I'm crazy?

A supply ship?

Angus didn't have to fake his exasperation.

If I put one finger on her, the sewage in DelSec would have me for breakfast.

And I sure as hell wouldn't come back here.

With a treasure like that, I could buy all the repairs I need somewhere else.

Then what were you doing?

I already told you.

I was after Succorso.

Why?

Deliberately Angus looked at Morn.

That also was the truth, but it had the effect of a lie.

Snarling, he said, Succorso was after the supply ship.

How do you know?

Shit!

Why the fucking hell do you think he broke curfew and blinked out of here?

Why do you think he hasn't come back?

All right.

What happened?

I never found the supply ship.

He attacked me.

Holed my thruster tube.

The only thing I've done since then is crawl back here.

Why did he attack you?

With difficulty, Angus refrained from yelling.

Take a guess.

Are you sure it was him?

No.

You got any ideas who else would jump me out in the middle of fucking nowhere for no fucking reason?

The inspectors shrugged as if the list of people who might fit that description were endless.

You broke curfew, Captain Thermopyle.

That charge will stick.

You weren't docked, but you were in Station control space.

You'll Have to surren- der your datacore.

The hell I will.

I told you.

I was after Succorso.

ST.E POA EN) 2Ro yD BOFNFAPL DD S7ON That changes nothing.

You broke curfew.

: I had orders.

Again Angus turned his glare on Morn.

I couldn't obey _ them and you too.

Still she didn't say anything.

This time, however, she took out her UMCP id tag for the inspectors to worry about.

Faced with the unexplained possibilities she represented-the possi- bility, for instance, that she'd commandeered Angus Thermopyle's ship to pursue Nick Succorso despite the curfew-the inspectors couldn't shake Angus' story.

They searched Bright Beauty as well as they could without knowing her secrets, but they didn't find anything.

Finally they looked at the damaged thruster tube.

It seemed to give them a certain amount of satisfac- tion.

If Captain Succorso comes in, we'll treat him the same way we did you.

If we find anything from that ship-anything at all-we'll lock him up for the rest of his natural life.

But if he's clean, we're not going to charge him for shooting at you.

Not unless you can prove it was him.

The inspectors smiled humorlessly.

Not unless you hand over your datacore and let us read it.

Thanks so much, Angus rasped.

You're all heart.

It's a pleasure get- ting justice and decent treatment from you.

But he was too worn-out to feel much relief-or any hope.

The ability to bluff the inspectors didn't solve his problems.

He was forbidden to leave Station, of course, but that was a minor inconvenience under the circumstances.

When the board of inquiry granted him temporary permission to disembark and make use of Com-Mine Sta- tion's facilities, he escorted the inspectors off Bright Beauty and sealed the hatches.

Then he put Morn to bed asleep and climbed into his bunk because there was nothing else he could do.

A few hours later, he woke up in a sweat of alarm; a knife against his heart told him he'd forgotten something, neglected something.

Something deadly.

He seemed to be waking up from a dream in which a terrible mistake was made clear to him.

Now, however, what that mistake was drifted out of his grasp while his lungs heaved and his chest pounded.

Bright Beauty's air conditioning chilled the sweat on his skin, but didn't do anything to cool off his fright.

Maybe it was just Station gravity weighing him down, making him feel leaden and defeated; maybe he was getting too old to shift easily between the presence and absence of g.

He wasn't used to thinking of himself as either old or young.

In fact, he didn't often pay much attention to his physical organism.

But now he tried to comfort himself with physiological speculations.

THeEVREALSTORY He was getting old.

He was having trouble adjusting to Station g.

That was all.

No.

He'd forgotten something.

Nick's taunts came back to him.

You're beaten.

Remember that.

I warned you.

He still had no idea why Nick let him live.

Neglected something.

He went back to the beginning to try to reason it out.

The explanation had to do with Morn, of course.

Nothing else made sense.

Nick let him live because killing him would kill her as well.

Nick was willing to risk her during the fight, for the sake of beating Angus Thermopyle, for the sake of repaying what Angus did to him; but after he won, he held back so she wouldn't be hurt.

Really?

Did that make sense?

Maybe not; but it was good enough to ease Angus' distress a little.

Rolling heavily out of his bunk, he scratched at the itch of sweat and grime inside his shipsuit, used the head, dabbed antiseptic from the sickbay on his swollen lip, and lumbered into the command module.

Almost at once, he saw the blip signaling automatically on his board.

He froze.

It was one of the alerts he'd programmed to warn him if Morn tried anything off-limits at her console.

.

For a moment-just for a moment-he didn't care what the alert actually was.

He was stunned by the impossibility of the situation.

He'd never given her a chance to do anything.

He watched her all the time.

When Bright Beauty was shut down, there wasn't any blip.

Was that right?

He scoured his memory.

Yes, that was right.

No blip then.

And after that he'd put her to sleep.

When could she have set it off?

No.

The recognition hit him harder than the alert itself.

He was remembering wrong.

He had given her a chance.

He'd left her alone in the command module while he went to let the inspectors aboard.

And again when they went away.

And after that he hadn't so much as glanced at his own controls.

He'd been too busy with the inquiry -too tired- Too beaten- Oh, shit.

Jerking into motion, he stabbed buttons on his console to identify the alert.

It was so far from what he expected that at first he couldn't believe it.

S LE P HOE N SR!

SDSOENSARL[D: SCOUN , ' The computer must be making a mistake.

Surely she'd done something worse | than that?

Wasn't she trying to kill him, get even with him?

Didn't she want ' to sabotage Bright Beauty?

But of course the computer wasn't making a mistake.

It showed _ clearly that Morn had jimmied the locks on one of Bright Beauty's exterior hatches, fixed them so they didn't seal.

Then she'd disconnected the auto- matic signal which warned of an unlocked hatch.

That was ridiculous.

His brain reeled, groping.

Unselfconsciously he wiped blood off his chin.

What had Morn accomplished?

The hatch still closed securely.

His ship still had integrity against the void.

But now- -now the hatch could be opened from outside.

Anybody with an EVA suit could sneak aboard.

Anybody with an EVA suit could have sneaked aboard while Angus was asleep.

Shitshitshitshit.

He was so surprised and lost that he jumped to all the wrong conclu- sions.

He checked on Morn first, half-expecting to discover she was already gone.

But she still slept where he'd left her under the influence of her zone implant.

So then he tuned Bright Beauty's life-sign scanners to read the whole ship for stowaways, hidden murderers, saboteurs.

There was no one else aboard: just Morn and himself.

Youre beaten.

Remember that.

I warned you.

Finally panic brought him a burst of inspiration.

He went to look in his secret holds.

They were full from deck to ceiling with food, equipment, and medi- cine.

Every crate and carton bore the seal which identified it as the prop- erty of Com-Mine Station-the kind of supplies Com-Mine received from Earth.

The kind of supplies a supply ship would carry.

When he went back to the command module and scanned around him, he saw Captain's Fancy in dock hardly fifty meters away.

She'd come in while he was asleep.

He was trapped.

Finished.

Dead.

The perfection of it astonished him.

No wonder Nick had seemed more than willing to encounter him in the doorway of Mallorys.

That gave Nick the chance to say the word "hatch"

in front of Morn.

And with that slender link between them they found a way to destroy the man they hated.

"Slender"

was too strong a word for it.

It was slim to the point of nonexistence.

Nevertheless Angus believed it instantly.

T HPEVMREAL STORY Bee  You're hatching something.

What else had she ever had to hope for?

Why don't you open up about it?

What else did she have left?

Let someone in to help you.

From the moment when she'd heard those words, she must have clung to them, searching them for meaning, chewed them inside and out.

In her place, he would have done the same thing.

Desperate for rescue, she must have worked like a maniac to find some interpretation which could save her.

And Nick's attack showed her he was serious, showed her she had reason to hope.

That was all she needed.

When she got the chance, she did some- thing about it.

) No, it wasn't enough.

It might have been enough for Morn .in her desperation, but it wasn't enough for Nick.

He would need to know she understood him.

What else had he said?

You've got it in your pocket right now.

Or are you playing with your- self?

Angus had assumed that was a reference to the zone-implant control; a lucky guess.

But now another possibility occurred to him.

Like everything else Nick had said, it was aimed at Morn.

- There had been plenty of time during the scuffle for Nick's people to put a note in Morn's pocket.

A note she would have found later, read, and then destroyed.

A note which told her what Nick wanted her to do.

That was why Nick had allowed Angus to arrange their encounter so easily.

So that his people could give Morn his message.

The rest of the plot was simple.

There never was a supply ship.

No, of course not.

The distress call was a fake, engineered by Nick Succorso and his ally in Security.

If the supply ship had been genuine, Security could have given him advance warning; but the emergency on which the plot depended couldn't have been predicted.

Therefore the whole thing hadn't happened.

The distress call had been faked to lure Angus away from Com-Mine-to set the stage for his ruin.

With a way to sneak aboard Bright Beauty, did Nick have Angus killed?

Did he simply kidnap Morn?

Of course not.

A murder would have caused serious trouble for Nick.

Despite Angus Thermopyle's reputation, Security would have done everything possible to nail his killer-if for no > LEP HEN &@R.t PDSOINFAH D'S ON _ other reason than to demonstrate its own integrity.

And if Morn disappeared from Bright Beauty while Angus was left alive, Nick would never be able to rest for fear of Angus' revenge.

No, the trap was perfect.

By filling Bright Beauty's holds with supplies provided-no doubt-by his ally in Security, Nick was able to arrange for Angus' destruction without risking Morn.

Or himself.

Now all he had to do was give the inspectors some evidence that a crime had been committed.

Then they would have the legal right to appro- priate Bright Beauty's datacore.

That would enable them to find the secret holds.

It would inform them of the murder of those miners.

And it might give them a clue about Morn's zone implant: the sickbay log was blank; but the datacore contained evidence of the parallel control he'd programmed into his board.

A life sentence for the theft of Station supplies.

And the death pen- alty for murder, if not for the use of a zone implant.

And Morn would go free, of course.

Straight to Nick Succorso.

The trap was perfect and horrible.

Stark panic rushed through Angus: every instinct he had gibbered for action.

Without pausing to think-with- out really realizing what he did-he strapped himself into his g-seat and began to warm up Bright Beauty's engines.

Get away: escape: run.

He was a coward; his instincts were compul- sory.

Undock and get out of here before Security had time to make a formal arrest.

They were going to kill him, kill him.

Get away now.

But he'd been forbidden to leave.

If he tried to pull away without permission, Com-Mine would fire on him.

With a holed thruster tube, he would never be able to evade the station's guns.

Bright Beauty would be destroyed.

Morn would be killed.

Get away!

You fool, you shithead, go, GO!

Morn would be killed.

Dismay twisted a cry out of him.

He was willing to risk Bright Beauty.

He'd done it before, when he had to.

But Morn- The last time he hit her, blood welled in her cheek; blood trickled from the cuts of her teeth inside her mouth.

Her beauty was marked red.

Thinking about her made his guts heave with terror and desire.

She was his, his, his, and if he tried to save himself, she would die.

So what?

he demanded of his lonely, forsaken life.

She's a bitch, and she did this to me so she can go whore with Nick Succorso.

Butcher her now, while she's asleep.

She deserves it.

That was what he wanted.

Every instinct in him wailed for it.

Kill her 7 HAEVIRGECA LSS TO RY ~ and go/ Better to get blasted fighting for your life than sit here and let them give you the death penalty while Nick motherfucking Succorso watches and laughs!

Unfortunately, his body refused to do it.

Shaking wildly, scarcely controllable, his hands discontinued the warm-up, shut Bright Beauty down again.

For a long time he sat where he was with his palms clamped over his eyes while instinct and terror fired back and forth inside his head like meteors across the dark.

Then, still shaking, he reached out and erased the parallel zone-im- plant control from his command computer.

He verified that his sickbay log contained nothing incriminating.

He made a few slight adjustments to his datacore, elisions which were theoretically impossible as well as actively illegal, but which he was able to accomplish because his techniques were so subtle.

After that, he woke up Morn Hyland.

She didn't meet his eyes.

That wasn't unusual, not in itself; but this time he knew what it meant, oh, he knew what it meant.

Briefly she strug- gled to shake off the effects of sleep.

However, she didn't get out of bed.

With an effort, her mouth produced a crooked smile.

If she noticed his stretched and haggard expression, she gave no sign.

Instead, she extended her arms toward him as if she'd been dreaming about him.

As if she wanted, actually wanted, to make love to him, despite his power over her; despite the things he'd done to her.

Involuntarily he recoiled.

Behind her smile, her face was studiously empty; blank and beautiful; determined to give nothing away.

She couldn't know what was going on, of course; not for sure: she could only guess.

She had little to pin her hopes on except one short note and the few sentences he and Nick had exchanged in the doorway of Mallorys.

And yet she fought for those hopes.

She was trying to distract him, in case he hadn't yet realized what she'd done.

.

When he saw that, something inside him broke.

For a moment, he hated her.

Somewhere, she'd found the one thing he'd always lacked, the courage to meet her doom head-on, to do what she could to control it.

And it was Nick she wanted, Nick she did it for; not Angus.

Now, however, it made no difference whether he hated her or not; whether he feared her or loved her.

He was no longer in comniand of his own actions.

What he said and did came to him like impulses from outside, abject and unpremeditated.

> REP AEN 6Rs SDIOTNZAM ID S1O N If he tried to get away, he would be killed.

If he didn't try to get away, he would be killed.

"Get up,"

he rasped without anger or conviction.

"We're going to Mallorys."

Somehow she managed to keep her features expressionless; she ac- cepted his rejection and rose from the bed without so much as a flicker of surprise or fright.

Watching her, he felt unexpectedly outclassed, as if the things he had done to her had made her greater than he was.

It might be too late.

Station Security might already be on the way to arrest him.

The control to her zone implant felt like a grenade in his pocket, primed to destroy him.

Nevertheless he went ahead without hurrying.

After she'd used the head, they left Bright Beauty for the last time and went to DelSec.

letieeeeRe SrA test.

O- RAY, Re) saa ae GrrigAcee Esk : ( Fn \ : allorys was crowded.

The time was Sta- tion evening; rats and cynics of every description had come out of the bulkheads to cadge drinks or sell secrets, share loneliness or court oblivion.

Nevertheless Angus Thermopyle didn't have any trouble finding a table.

His reputation was bad enough already: nobody wanted to be near him, not while he was suspected of looting a supply ship.

If any shooting started, Mallorys' patrons didn't want to get caught in the cross fire.

Most of the crowd probably desired nothing more complex than com- panionship or peace; or maybe satisfaction for their guesses about what was going on.

That night was a bad one for quiet, however.

Angus and Morn looked much the same as usual, as unsuited to each other as ever.

Still they emitted an expectant tension which affected everyone around them, making calm men uneasy and uneasy men nervous.

Angus glowered violence at anybody who crossed his gaze; blood from his swollen lip marked his chin.

Pale, blank, and unsure, Morn held herself like a coiled spring, restrained only by willpower and circumstance from doing something wild.

The mood in Mallorys thickened steadily around them.

Then Nick Succorso and some of his people came in.

He was in a cheerful humor, laughing and joking, but no one was 1 HFEWMRCESA LSS TO.

RY reassured.

The way he ignored Angus and Morn didn't make anybody relax: the scars under his eyes were too dark.

Something was going to happen.

The people who didn't wish to know what that was, left as inconspic- uously as possible.

Everyone else got ready for sudden movements.

When Security broke into the bar, some of the observers were sur- prised.

The ones who'd probed a bit below the surface and thought they knew what was going on weren't.

Tables and chairs clattered back hastily: people milled around, jeer- ing, cheering, trying to clear the way: a squad of guards drove into the confusion as fast as they could, determined to get their hands on Angus before he escaped.

- So quickly that most people didn't see her do it, Morn Hyland left him and started through the crowd in Nick's direction.

But Angus was braced for her flight.

He had good reflexes, and fear made him fast.

This was the reason he'd brought her to Mallorys, the mo- ment on which his life depended.

He was a coward; and like a coward, he wanted to go on living even though his heart was broken.

He hardly saw Security: he took note of the confusion around him only as a screen for his own actions.

Quick as a snake, he caught Morn by the wrist.

She struggled as well as she could.

He was too strong.

While she thrashed against his grip, she looked at him: the loathing and fright in her face were as loud as screams.

Or maybe what she felt was incomprehension; maybe she thought he'd decided on a particularly brutal form of suicide.

She'd been hoping, pleading, aching for an escape with every gram of her spirit-and now he'd caught her.

If he didn't release her- He wanted to say something, but there were no words for it.

And no time.

His doom gathered against him.

Security charged in from the door: Nick and his crew thrust forward from the other side, wedging a path for Morn through the crowd.

Holding her by the wrist, te slipped the control to her zone implant into her hand.

"T accept.

The deal you offered.

I'll cover you.

"Remember,"

he hissed as if he were pleading with her, begging her, "T could have killed you.

I could have killed you anytime."

Then he let her go.

: For a second, her eyes flared, and she stared at him.

During that moment, she seemed to understand him.

Recognition S'T.E PAE N 2K See FORN PASE DSP OEN passed between them.

He had brought her here for this.

To let her go.

To give her what she wanted.

And to ask her to spare his life.

Inside himself, he was stark naked with terror.

She had only a second to make her choice.

Then Nick's people reached her, snatched her away.

But by that time she'd already shoved the zone-implant control like a small piece of immortality into one of her pockets, where no one could see it and take it to use against Angus Thermopyle.

Or against Morn herself.

After that, she was gone.

ihimeeeneers wes) tO RY.

Cle yale Abd maie [Ss a -N Fn S: the fair maiden was rescued.

The swash- buckling pirate bore her away with all her beauty, and her tormentor was left to pay the price of his crimes.

Angus was convicted of nothing more than stealing Station supplies.

The evidence of Bright Beauty's datacore was curiously imprecise.

And the techs who examined Starmaster couldn't find any indication that the UMCP ship did anything except blow herself up; whether by sabotage or self-destruct was unclear.

Without Morn's testimony, nothing else could be proved against Angus Thermopyle.

Nevertheless that was enough to put him in lockup for the rest of his life.

Morn must have had an easier time with Nick than with Angus.

Almost certainly he would have treated her better than Angus did-espe- cially if he knew nothing, or could never be sure, about the zone implant.

With the control in her own hands, she was effectively as free as if the implant had been removed.

A timer and a little common sense made it possible for her to take care of her own gap-sickness.

The fact that he'd rescued her so cleverly only enhanced Nick Succor- so's reputation.

The way he'd framed Angus was too perfect to be criticized.

After all, the Station recovered its supplies.

And the arrival of the real supply ship on schedule revealed just how clever Nick had been.

The real story, however, was that Angus never complained he'd been THRE, REA LAS TO RY framed.

He never mentioned there was a traitor in Security; he made no effort to defend himself.

For the most part, he betrayed no reaction at all to his doom.

When he heard Bright Beauty was going to be dismantled, he howled as if he were in agony; but he let Morn and Nick go.

He had that much courage, anyway.

Despite his horror of imprisonment, he was condemned to stay in lockup until he rotted.

This is the end of The Real Story.

The story continues in The Gap into Vision: Forbidden Knowledge.

S TLE P AOE N Rab #DZO4NBARL D.S.OIN Ad ted ig i ph a nt Eo Most writers hate the question, "Where do you get your ideas?"

This is because the answer tends to be at once ineffably mysterious and excruciatingly mundane.

We are all in love with the magic of the imagi- nation-otherwise we wouldn't be able to survive as creative artists-but none of us can explain how it works.

In a sense, writers don't get ideas: ideas get writers.

They happen to us.

If we don't submit to their power, we lose them; so by trying to control or censor them we can make the negative choice of encouraging them to leave us alone.

But we can never force our- selves to be truly creative..

The best we can do is to teach ourselves receptive- ness-and trust that ideas will come.

However, once the magic of the imagination has been accepted as given, any specific answer to the question often becomes almost violently anti-creative: for instance, "Well, I got that particular idea off a can of Lysol disinfectant in the men's room at Circle K."

(I'm not making this up.

One of the strongest scenes in The Power that Preserves was triggered in my head by a can of Lysol disinfectant in a men's room.) Such an answer may be per- fectly accurate, but who wants to say it out loud?

In these cases, the concrete source of the idea seems to demean its underlying imaginative magic.

Hence the apparently arrogant or dismissive answers which writers have been giving ever since readers began asking the question.

But occasionally one or another of us is able to offer a practical answer without experiencing too much dissonance between what we say and how we dt APE REA LAS TLO RY feel about what we're saying.

This Afterword is a case in point.

I can discuss the sources and development for the sequence of four novels which follows directly after The Real Story while suffering no more severe distress than a blind astonishment that my mind works so slowly.

For some reason, a fair number of my best stories arise, not from one idea, but from two.

In these cases, one idea comes first; it excites me enough to stay with me; yet despite its apparent (to me) potential, it stubbornly refuses to grow.

Rather than expanding to take on character, event, and context, it simply sits in my head-often for many years-saying over and over again, "Look at me, you idiot.

If you just Jooked at me, you would know what to do with me."' Well, I do look; but I can't see what I need-until the first idea is intersected by the second.

And then: Step back, boys and girls.

She's a gusher.

I've heard Brian Aldiss talk about the same phenomenon.

For him, a novel often requires two ideas.

He describes them as a combination of "'the familiar' and "the exotic.""

He begins with "the familiar"

-usually some- thing germane to his personal life, either thematically or experientially-but he can't write about it until "the familiar"

is impacted by "the exotic."

In his case, "'the exotic"

is usually a science fictional setting in which "the familiar"

can play itself out: "the exotic"

provides him with a stage on which he can dramatize "the familiar."

Rather like a binary poison-or a magic potion- two inert elements combine to produce something of frightening potency.

The same dynamic works in reverse for me.

I start with "the exotic"

(remember that these are Aldiss's terms, not mine), but that idea declines to turn into a story until it is catalysed by "the familiar."

For example: The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant is squarely-and solely-founded on two ideas: unbelief and leprosy.

The notion of writing a fantasy about an "unbeliever,"

a man who rejects the whole concept of fantasy, first came to me near the end of 1969.

But the germ was dormant: no matter how I labored over it, I couldn't make it grow.

Until I realized, in May of 1972, that my "unbeliever"

should be a leper.

As soon as those two ideas came together, my brain took fire.

I spent the next three months fever- ishly taking notes, drawing maps, envisioning characters; studying the impli- cations of unbelief and leprosy.

Then I began writing.

This dynamic reverses Aldiss's because leprosy represented "'the famil- iar"

rather than "the exotic."

I'd never written fantasy before: The whole concept of writing a fantasy about an "unbeliever"

was exotic.

However, STE (POR BIN SR 4D EOINGARL (D S7OEN thanks to the fact that my father was an orthopedic surgeon in India for twenty-one years, I was accustomed to leprosy on a variety of levels.

In the case of the four novels which ensue from The Real Story, the two ideas might be labelled "Angus Thermopyle"

and "Richard Wagner."

Contrary to what one might expect, Angus represents "the familiar."

I wrote the first draft of The Real Story in the summer of 1985.

At the time, I thought I was simply writing a novella: The idea came to me, so I worked on it at my earliest opportunity.

(Where did that idea come from?

Well, this is a little embarrassing.

It grew entirely out of the names of the characters.

Driving through Albuquer- que one day, I suddenly found myself chanting like a mantra, "Angus Thermopyle.

Angus Thermopyle."

I couldn't begin to guess why that name had appeared; but I could feel its importance, so I kept on chanting it.

For weeks.

And then, as if accidentally, another name manifested itself: Morn Hyland.

So I chanted, "Angus Thermopyle,"

and, "Morn Hyland"-until they were joined by Nick Succorso.

By this time, I liked the names so much that I began consciously trying to pull together a story good enough for them.) My original intentions were explicitly archetypal.

What I had in mind was an aesthetically perfect variation on the basic three-sided story: the story in which a Victim (Morn), a Villain (Angus), and a Rescuer (Nick) all change roles.

(This, incidentally, is the essential difference between melo- drama and drama.

Melodrama presents a Victim, a Villain, and a Rescuer.

Drama offers the same characters and then studies the process by which they change roles.) Victimized by Angus, Morn is rescued by Nick-but that, of course, is not the real story.

The real story has to do with the way in which Nick becomes Angus's victimizer and Morn becomes Angus's rescuer.

When I'd finished the first draft of the novella, however, I found myself in a state of acute distress, for at least three reasons-only two of which were conscious.

First, I realized immediately that what I'd written was by no means "aesthetically perfect."

My work had fallen below my original intentions rather farther than usual.

I'd planned a balanced triangle, with equal attention paid to each character and equal emphasis placed on each shifting role.

But in practice I was unable to produce that balance.

Put simply, the problem was that Angus had taken over the story.

Vital and malign, he dominated the narrative, reducing Morn to a shadow- and Nick to a cypher.

In some ways, this made sense: as long as the action T HABVRJECA LaS ft O'R: Y was viewed from Angus's point of view, Morn's motivations were unknow- able, and Nick's were unimportant.

But the result was that I'd written an intensive study of Angus's movement from Villain to Victim; but I'd only sketched in Morn's shift from Victim to Rescuer; and I hadn't paid any attention at all to Nick's change from Rescuer to Villain.

(If I weren't so damn slow, this would have given me a powerful clue to the third, unconscious reason for my distress.) I was quite disappointed in myself.

Yet I was also aware of another reason for my distress.

Unlike any other character I'd ever created, Angus made me feel exposed.

It was as if in imagining him I'd tapped directly into the dark side of my own nature; as if I'd found him inside myself instead of inventing him.

(In Aldiss's terms, he was "the familiar.") And that in turn shamed me.

I felt irrationally sure that anyone who read The Real Story would see the "real"

me, recognize the truth, and be disgusted.

Because I was ashamed of the novella, both artistically and personally, I decided not to publish it.

At the time, I believed that I would never publish it.

Well, time works wonders.

Among other things, it gives us the chance to think.

And after I'd thought for a while, I began trying to do something about my shame.

There was nothing to be done about my personal shame, of course.

I could only dismiss it.

Time and thought brought me to the realization that I had no reason to feel ashamed.

Suppose for a moment that my worst fears were realistic: that I am in fact an Angus Thermopyle thinly disgused by niceness; that this fact is transparent in The Real Story; and that all right- thinking readers will be disgusted by the results.

So what?

None of that impinges on the integrity of The Real Story itself.

If 1 drew on some buried part of myself to create Angus, so much the better: at least I'm writing what I know.

In any case, the crucial question for any artist is not: What are people going to think of me?

It is: Have I given my best to my work?

Nothing else matters.

Where The Real Story was concerned, I had to answer, "Yes and no."

Yes, I was doing exactly what I'm supposed to do when I wrote the novella: I accepted the idea of "Angus"

for the simple and sufficient reason that it came to me; I followed the idea where it chose to lead me, rather than trying to make it serve my own purposes.

And no, I hadn't given my best to the work: I hadn't done everything in my power to raise the aesthtic level of the novella as high as possible.

So I spent the next two years, off and on, rewriting The Real Story.

> TiE'P HSIN ERA ADSORNZARL ID SStOEN 17] Indeed, I put it through my word processor at least six different times, devel- oping and focusing Morn, enhancing Nick.

And eventually I came to the conclusion that I was never going to be able to make it "aesthetically per- fect."

Judged by the standard of my original intentions, this book would always be a failure.

For me as a writer, the effort of dealing with Angus was so urgent and compulsory that I couldn't treat Morn and Nick as his equals.

What we might call the spatial constraints of the narrative didn't leave enough room for them.

(There it was again: a clue to the third, unconscious reason for my distress.

But I still didn't recognize the truth.) Fortunately, I was saved from the belief that The Real Story was doomed to artistic failure by what Dr.

Who refers to as "lateral thinking."

If you have an unscalable cliff in front of you and an unbeatable monster be- hind you, go sideways.

Obedient to that dictum, I began to ask myself, not, "How did I go wrong within the novella?"

but, "Where did I go wrong in my original intentions?"

Where, indeed?

Well, where else?

The Real Story was based on only one idea-and a fair number of my best stories arise, not from one idea, but from two.

My problems with the book resulted from the need for a second idea.

However, I've told this story backward.

The Real Story was actually the second idea, not the first.

When I combined it with another idea which had already been in my head-alive, exciting, and totally static-for twenty years, I had a gusher.

The real story, however, was that Angus never complained he'd been framed.

He never mentioned there was a traitor in Secu- tity; he made no effort to defend himself.

For the most part, he betrayed no reaction at all to his doom.

When he heard Bright Beauty was going to be dismantled, he howled as if he were in agony; but he let Morn and Nick go.

He had that much courage, anyway.

Despite his horror of imprisonment, he was condemned to stay in lockup until he rotted.

So ends The Real Story.

There's no indication here, certainly, that events will take four more books to run their course-or that the course they tun will be epic in the Wagnerian sense; as large-scaled, intense, and ambi- tious as anything in The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant.

That's because the original source for this sequence of novels was a recording of Richard 'Wag- TASER SECA SL SS FO RY.

- ner's Gtterdammerung (The Twilight of the Gods); the true genesis began in the fall of 1966.

.

That recording, which I purchased in September of 1966, wasn't my first experience with Wagner; but it was my first taste of Wagner's four-part opera cycle, Der Ring des Nibelungen (The Ring of the Nibelung), and it inspired me to purchase as quickly as my finances permitted (I spent three years saving pennies) recordings of the other three parts of The Ring: Das Rheingold (The Rhine Gold), Die Walkiire (The Valkyrie), and Siegfried (no translation necessary).

In a relatively short time, I knew that I'd discovered my musical alter-ego-a kind of transcendental dopplegdnger.

Wagner's mu- sic inspired me.

(Indeed, some of the literary techniques of The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant were extrapolated from the way Wagner used musical ideas.) And the story of The Ring-especially in the twin climaxes of The Valkyrie and The Twilight of the Gods-moved me as deeply as any story I've ever encountered.

Soon after I fell in love with The Ring, I conceived the ambition of writing a sequence of novels based on Wagner's epic.

My intentions were conceptual rather than literal.

I wasn't interested in simply retelling the story of Wotan's doomed struggle to preserve the power of the gods in the face of pressure from giants, dwarves, and human- kind.

Rather I wanted to create an analogue which would allow me to explore the same themes and exigencies on my own terms.

Most particularly, I was fascinated by Wotan himself, who finds that an understanding of his own power leads to the destruction of that power, as well as of himself and everything he represents; even more, that an understanding of his power leads him to will his own destruction.

But the idea remained utterly and entirely static-until 1987, when I realized that the world of Angus, Morn, and Nick offered me the perfect setting for the story I had in mind.

(In addition, of course, I realized that using The Real Story to launch a larger narrative gave me a perfect opportunity to make constructive use of the ways in which it didn't measure up to my original intentions.

The relative imbalance of the roles in the novella becomes a strength rather than a weak- ness when its implications can be pursued in subsequent books.

This was the third, unconscious reason for my distress concerning The Real Story.

My work there disturbed me because it wasn't complete-and couldn't be com- pleted without the catalysis of a second idea.) .

As the ending of The Real Story suggests, the relevance of Wagner's epic to Angus's fate may not be readily apparent.

That's the only excuse I can S TER HEN R2 PDSOINSARL D 'S'OWN | : ( | offer for my slowness to comprehend that Wagner and Angus needed each other.

Fortunately or unfortunately, depending on whether afterwords are considered a pleasure or an affliction, I can't explain the relevance without discussing The Ring in some detail.

Put simply, Wagner's opera cycle tells the story of how the gods were _ brought down by two things: a bitter curse; and an act of unselfish heroism.

Das Rheingold In a world where humankind is the weakest and least effective form of life, the gods (Wotan; Fricka, his wife, goddess of family and hearth; Donner, god of storm; Froh, god of light; Loge, god of fire; and Freia, goddess of eternal life) rule proudly-although they are neither the oldest nor the most potent forces or beings in their sphere.

However, their power is precarious: It depends on their ability to compel submission from two magical and creative races, the giants (builders of large things) and the dwarves (builders of small things), both of which aspire to supplant the gods.

Hungry for supremacy, Wotan has carved a staff from the World Tree; and into his staff he cuts the bargains and treaties he makes to consolidate his dominance, so that his authority becomes part of the natural order.

But precisely because his rule is based on authority and law rather than on love or virtue, it inspires resent- ment.

So, to make himself and the gods secure, he cuts a deal with the giants to build an impregnable fortress for him: Valhalla.

His idea is to fill Valhalla with heroes to fight for him, so that he can resist any challenge from either giants or dwarves.

Two problems arise immediately, however: one of his own making, one outside his control.

The one he can't control involves three watery females, the Rhine Maidens, and a dwarf, Alberich, who falls in lust with them.

(All right, I admit it: I've never found the Rhine Maidens themselves especially convinc- ing.) The Maidens were fathered by one of the aforementioned older beings, and their purpose in life (or at least in the Rhine) is to guard the Rhine Gold, one of the archetypal sources of power (like the World Tree).

Now, the secret of the Rhine Gold is this: Any being who "foreswears love,"

giving up all bonds of passion or commitment, takes the Gold, and forges it into a ring, will gain the power to impose his will on others.

This the Maidens gleefully reveal to Alberich, primarily because they think his lust-and loneliness-are funny.

(Characters with nothing better to do in a story than sit around being archetypal are often rather insensitive.) But they underestimate the scale of his loneliness and desire.

Taunted Di MPEMROECA LST OUR.

Y.

past bearing by beauties he cannot have, he does indeed foreswear love, take the Gold, and forge it into a ring.

Before anyone notices what he's up to, he gains dominion over all the dwarves, accumulates a vast treasure-and com- mences to plan his attack on the gods.

Thus begins an evil which can only be ended by returning the Gold to the Maidens.

The problem Wotan could have avoided, if he were wiser-i.e., less hungry for power-is that for the sake of getting Valhalla built "on the cheap"

he has made a bargain with the giants which he has no intention of keeping: He has offered them Freia (source of the gods' immortality) in exchange for the fortress.

This is manifestly misguided, since his supremacy depends on bargains and agreements; but he is young, strong, and arrogant- and he believes that once Valhalla is built he'll be able to persuade the giants to accept some other payment.

No such luck.

The giants want Freia, or to hell with Valhalla and the gods.

(They realize, of course, that without her the gods can't endure; so their insistence on correct payment is inspired by a desire to bring Wotan down.) This is a terrible moment for Wotan-he's doomed if he breaks his bargain, and doomed if he keeps it-but he isn't yet wise enough to realize the full implications.

Instead of facing up to the consequences of his own actions, he hits upon a solution of convenience.

Maybe the giants will accept Alberich's treasure (and ring) as payment in Freia's place.

The giants agree: they've heard about the ring.

.

At this point, Alberich's only weakness is that he isn't yet accustomed to the sheer size of his new power.

He doesn't really understand that he stands on the brink of godhood himself: He's too busy enjoying his treasure- and his ability to torture his own people with impunity.

In consequence, he's vulnerable, not to force, but to trickery.

Helped by the cunning of Loge, Wotan obtains the ring by subterfuge and immediately uses it to master both Alberich and the treasure.

has no right to the ring, but he is immediately consumed by desire for its power.

However, his position deteriorates further when Alberich curses the ring.

Only in losing the ring does Alberich grasp its magnitude.

In an apothe- osis of grief and rage, he cries: As its gold gave me power without limit, now let its magic bring death to whoever wears it.

.

No happy man shall be glad of it, no fortunate man know the smile of its bright gleam.

S'T ER HE N&R) GDS0OR.NSAMEDESTOAN Whoever possess it shall be seared by anxiety, and whoever has it not, shall be nagged by envy.

Everyone shall hanker for its possession but no one enjoy it to advantage.

Without gain its master shall guard it, for it draws him to his assassin.

Condemned to death the coward will be in fear's grip.

As long as he lives he shall long for death, the ring's master be slave to the ring.

.

.

.

Now Wotan is in real trouble.

The ring is cursed, but he desires it too much to give it up.

Yet it is the only payment the giants will accept in Freia's place.

Without her, the gods must die.

Wotan can't simply declare war on the giants because the enforcement of his bargains is carved into his staff, the source of his power: to violate his own commitments will undo him.

And the natural order of existence can only be restored by returning the Gold to the Rhine Maidens-which will force Freia into the hands of the giants.

At last Wotan begins to understand his plight.

With a little help from Erda, the Earth Mother (another of those preexisting beings), he gains enough insight to realize that he must surrender the ring.

So the giants take the ring; Freia remains with the gods; and Wotan gets Valhalla.

Alas, this is only a stop-gap resolution.

The natural order is still in jeopardy.

The ring remains a threat to the gods.

And the curse works: The giants proceed to slaughter each other until only one remains to hold the ring; and that one sequesters himself (as a dragon), dedicating his entire being to the simple goal of preventing anyone from getting the ring away from him.

Die Walkuere Wotan is now obsessed with understanding his dilemma.

After some intensive study with Erda (study which just happens to produce eight daugh- ters-the Valkyries), he learns that the only cure for the evil of the ring is to return the Gold to the Maidens.

Unfortunately, he can't do that: He can't get the ring away from the dragon without breaking his bargain with the giants.

However, in due course he hits on the only apparent solution to the problem: He decides to use an agent to obtain the ring for him.

First, on a human woman he gets himself a son, Siegmund (and, not coincidentally, a daughter as well, Sieglinde, Siegmund's twin).

Then he trains his son to be strong, brave, and desperate enough to tackle a dragon.

Sadly, this training involves separating Siegmund and Sieglinde and aban- D PEM RCETA CS TO: RY doning them both to lives of extreme loneliness, abuse, and danger.

Neither of them has any idea that their father loves them-and needs them.

All they know of life is bitter survival against cruel odds.

Too bad.

Wotan's plan was flawed from the beginning-a fact that becomes transparent when Siegmund and Sieglinde find each other and fall in love (she gets pregnant).

This attracts the attention of Fricka: As goddess of matrimony, she's responsible for punishing sins like incest.

She forces Wotan to recognize that any agent of his is no different from him; that for Siegmund to get the ring will be the same as if Wotan himself took it.

Therefore Wotan can't use Siegmund to solve his problems for him; and so he has no defense against Fricka's argument that Siegmund and Sieglinde must die for their crime.

Broken-hearted-and aware of his own doom- Wotan commands his favorite Valkyrie, Brunnhilde, to make sure that Sieg- mund and Sieglinde are killed by Hunding, Sieglinde's rapist/husband.

It is Brunnhilde's act of unselfish heroism which changes the nature of the dilemma.

As Wotan's favorite, she thinks of herself as his will incarnate.

How- ever, his pain when he condemns Siegmund and Sieglinde moves her deeply.

And she is further distraught by Siegmund's passionate and fatal loyalty to Sieglinde.

At the last, the Valkyrie chooses not to help Hunding execute Siegmund.

Instead, she fights for Siegmund against Hunding, directly defy- ing Wotan, the All-Father.

Outraged, Wotan intervenes personally, killing both Siegmund and Hunding.

In the confusion, however, Brunnhilde escapes with Sieglinde.

If Siegmund cannot be saved, perhaps his son can be preserved.

She helps Sieglinde flee into a trackless forest (the same forest, incidentally, where the dragon guards his treasure), then turns to face Wotan's wrath (thereby buy- ing Sieglinde time to run).

Because she has opposed him, Wotan condemns Brunnhilde to an enchanted sleep, from which she can only be awakened by the shame of being "taken"

as a mortal's lover.

And because he loves her, he guards her sleep with a fire which will prevent any man who isn't utterly fearless from approaching her.

Siegfried Sieglinde, meanwhile, struggles on into the forest.

Close to death, she comes upon a cave where Mime, Alberich's brother, has been living ever since Alberich's hold over the dwarves was broken.

Mime keeps her alive until her son, Siegfried, is born; after she dies in childbirth, he raises young Siegfried with one goal in mind: to make Siegfried utterly fearless so that S TEP A EN SRS PDEORNSAS D'S*OrN he'll be brave enough to fight the the dragon and get the ring for his foster father.

Like most plans in this story, Mime's proves flawed.

For one thing, both Wotan and Alberich know what he's doing-and Alberich has plans of his own.

For another, Mime succeeds only too well: He teaches Siegfried to be so fearless that Siegfried can't stand the sight of his craven foster father and won't do anything for the dwarf.

Trying to trick him, Mime tells Sieg- fried he'll learn something wonderful-fear-if he meets the dragon; so Sieg- fried decides to accept the adventure, despite his loathing for Mime.

But this, too, doesn't work out well for poor Mime.

Instead of learning fear, Siegfried kills the dragon (laughing all the way) and gets the ring; in addition, he captures a magic talisman, the | tarnhelm, which makes him a shape-changer, and gains from the dragon's blood the ability to understand birds.

At once, a bird tells him that Mime is about to poison him.

In righteous indignation, Siegfried kills Mime.

Then the bird tells him about Brunnhilde.

Hungry for more adventures, he goes off to rescue her.

Along the way, he encounters Wotan, who forbids him to approach the magic fire.

But Siegfried is nothing if not self-willed: Oblivious to symbol- ism, he breaks Wotan's spear and continues his quest to rescue the enchanted woman.

(Without his spear, of course, Wotan is finished.

In fact, he had reason to believe that his spear wouldn't stop the boy.

His decision to chal- lenge Siegfried regardless is complex.

On the one hand, he knows that if his spear can't stop Siegfried the gods are doomed anyway: They'll never be able to control whatever use is made of the ring.

On the other, he understands that unless his spear-his rule-is shattered, the world will never be free of the destructive effects of his bargains.

He challenges Siegfried in an attempt to simultaneously save and destroy himself.) Gotterdammerung In a manner of speaking, Siegfried is a dream come true for Brunn- hilde-a mortal so heroic that he might as well be a god.

She gives him her heart, as well as a spell to protect him from any danger as long as he doesn't turn his back on it; and he goes out into the world to have more adventures so that she'll be proud of him.

(I should perhaps have mentioned earlier that Siegfried isn't very bright.) Almost immediately, he finds himself in the domain of the Gibichungs, a human tribe with failed ambitions and an imprecise moral sense.

They are led by Gunther, unwed; his spinster sister, Gutrune; and his DT PEA REAL RS FT OOR-Y half-brother, Hagan (Alberich's son and agent).

The Gibichungs want glory through Siegfried; Hagan wants the ring.

Toward those ends, they conspire to give Siegfried a potion which causes him to forget Brunnhilde.

Then they send him to obtain Brunnhilde for Gunther (using the tarnhelm to appear as Gunther), for which his reward will be Gutrune's hand in marriage.

(This only works becaue Siegfried can't remember ever meeting another woman, so to him Gutrune looks good.) When Brunnhilde is brought from the safety of her magic fire and given to Gunther, she is quite understandably outraged by Siegfried's appar- ent betrayal.

She denounces him furiously.

Hagan promptly gives Siegfried another potion which causes him to remember Brunnhilde and forget Gu- trune; and as soon as Siegfried unselfconsciously admits the substantial accu- racy of Brunnhilde's denunciation, Hagan claims that revelation as an excuse to spear Siegfried in the back.

Even in death, however, Siegfried is so strong that no one can get the ring away from him.

And Brunnhilde is at last able to see the truth of his behavior.

To honor him, she commands a funeral pyre and joins him on it.

As soon as fire melts the ring, the Rhine Maidens are able to reclaim their gold.

The story ends with the natural order restored-and Valhalla burning in the background.

So the gods are brought to an end, and humankind is freed from arbitrary external dominance to work out its own destiny.

(The logic here is profound, yet difficult to explain.

Once Wotan's spear was broken, the gods were, in effect, kept alive by the force of Albe- tich's curse.

They couldn't die: The holder of the ring could be murdered, but everyone else who fell under the curse was compelled to yearn and suffer helplessly, as long as the ring-and therefore the curse-endured.) So what, one might well ask, does all this have to do with ore piracy and space stations?

The answer is simple enough, as long as another, more concrete ques- tion is answered first.

If Angus Thermopyle is a pirate who preys on human miners and shipping, to whom does he sell his booty?

Ore isn't cash, after all: It's relatively useless unless it can be processed.

And ore processing is capital intensive.

Pirates like Angus and Nick would never exist-and the UMCP in turn would have no mandate to combat them-unless they had a market for their ill-gotten gains.

So what kind of world lies behind The-Real Story?

Is humankind publicly divided against itself?

Or is it in conflict with something else; something anti-human?

Doesn't the UMCP mandate against piracy sT.EP HOG N ZR Y DION D SOON derive its moral authority from the fact that the pirates are, in effect, selling out humankind?

Once such questions have been asked (in the context of Der Ring des Nibelungen), the step from The Real Story to the next book, Forbidden Knowledge, is a small one.

As soon as I began to think of the UMCP as legal gods threatened by the science fiction equivalent of shape-changing dwarves, I could hardly stop before I reached the wonderfully perverse notion of Angus and Morn as Siegmund and Sieglinde.

And after that, as I've already indicated, my story became a gusher.

However, imagining Angus and Morn as Siegmund and Sieglinde suggests just how fundamentally non-literal my use of The Ring is.

The Ring is not my story: It is one of the seeds from which my story grew.

In several ways, I've moved a considerable distance from my source.

For one thing, there are themes in Wagner that I don't want to pursue.

His work contains a kind of structural sexism which leaves me cold.

(The Rhine Maidens make me think of the scene in Monty Python and the Holy Grail where a peasant shouts at Arthur, "You can't wield supreme executive power just because some watery tart pitched a sword at you!"') And I don't respond to characters whose power derives from their "innocence": To my mind, Siegfried is untrammeled by fear, not because of his innocence, but because he's too stupid to live.

Wagner's idea that knowledge paralyzes power seems inadequate to me-witness the entire Chronicles of Thomas Covenant.

For another, "Angus Thermopyle"

alters the essential terms and pos- sibilities of "Richard Wagner."

In a sense, setting is story-and the setting of The Real Story is science fictional rather than mythopoeic.

Almost by defini- tion, the conflicts of the story now become political rather than archetypal.

Of necessity, every valence of The Ring is transformed.

The most obvious result is that the onus of the story shifts from gods and dwarves to human beings.

If human life in space is to be preserved, it must be preserved, not by All-Fathers and Valkyries, but by the descendants of the Gibichungs.

The consequences of this transformation are everywhere.

Just to men- tion a few examples.

My "gods"

derive their ability to endure, not from immortality,'but from their control over information.

As a crime against the order which the UMCP is pledged to protect, incest would have no meaning; so there's no reason for Angus and Morn to be siblings.

And I use no direct T-HfEARCECA L SS 710 RY analogues to either Wotan's staff or Alberich's ring-although Angus's ability to edit datacores has interesting implications.

Yet The Ring is present in each of the four novels which follows The Real Story.

When characters like Warden Dios, Min Donner, Godsen Frik, and Hashi Lebwohl take the stage, they come, as one might say, "trailing clouds of glory"-the ether of their Wagnerian avatars.

And who better to represent the dwarves than the Amnion, who-desire nothing less than the destruction of the natural existence of humanity?

Whether Angus and Morn can preserve their own humanity (not to mention their entire species) is a question which could only have arisen from the intersection of The Real Story and Der Ring des Nibelungen.

STE (ACR ESN -R SD ZOaN BAGLID 2SkO IN (Continued from front flap) something none of them would have believed.

Here is that story, as told by one of the modern giants of imaginative fiction.

The Real Story takes us to a remarkably detailed world of faster-than-light travel (Known as "crossing the Gap"), politics and betrayal, extraordinary technological development, and a shadowy presence just outside our view.

It confirms.

Stephen R.

Donaldson's deep awareness of the wellsprings of the human condition and of the implacable conflict of good and evil within each of us.

It begins the fiercest, most profound story that he has ever written.

Includes a special afterword from the author.

\UTHOR PHOTO  HELEN MARCUS STEPHEN R.

DONALDSON was born in Cleveland, Ohio, in 1947, and as the son of an American missionary spent his early years in India.

After serving as a conscientious objector during the Vietnam War, he attended Kent State University, where he earned a master's degree in English.

Donaldson made his writing debut with the first Thomas Covenant books in 1977; the series quickly became an international bestseller.

He was awarded the prestigious John W.

Campbell Award as Best New Writer in 1979.

He currently lives in New Mexico, where he is working on the next book in the Gap series.

Jacket illustration  1990 Chris Hopkins

--- NEXT VOLUME ---

More Advance Praise for Ready Player One "[An] adrenaline shot of uncut geekdom ...

sweet, self-deprecating Wade, whose universe is an odd mix of the real past and the virtual present, is the perfect lovable/unlikely hero."

-Publishers Weekly "The pure, unfettered brainscream of a child of the '80s, like a dream my thirteen-year-old self would have had after bingeing on Pop Rocks and Coke....

I couldn't put it down."

-Charles Ardai, Edgar Awardwinning author and producer of Haven "Pure geek heaven.

Ernest Cline's hero competes in a virtual world with life- and-death stakes-which is only fitting, because he's fighting to make his dreams into reality.

Cline blends a dystopic future with meticulously detailed nostalgia to create a story that will resonate in the heart of every true nerd."

"A fantastic adventure set in a futuristic world with a retro heart.

Once I started reading, I didn't want to put it down and I couldn't wait to pick it back up."

"Cline has somehow managed to jack into the nervous system of some great warm collective geek-dream nostalgia of the '70s and '80s and used the precious touchstones he's rediscovered there to create an adventure that's almost more experienced than read....

Ready Player One let me romp through some of the best memories of my youth."

"Imagine that Dungeons and Dragons and an '80s video arcade made hot, sweet love, and their child was raised in Azeroth.

If you're not already experiencing a nerdgasm at the thought, I don't want to know you."

"Ready Player One expertly mines a copious vein of 1980s pop culture, catapulting the reader on a light-speed adventure in an advanced but backward- looking future.

If this book were a living room, it would be wood-paneled.

If it were shoes, it would be high-tops.

And if it were a song, well, it would have to be 'Eye of the Tiger.' I really, really loved it."

"I was blown away by this book....

Ernie Cline has pulled the raddest of all magic tricks: He's managed to write a novel that's at once serious and playful, that is as fun to read as it is harrowing.

A book of ideas, a potboiler, a game-within-a-novel, a serious science-fiction epic, a comic pop-culture mash- up-call this novel what you will, but Ready Player One will defy every label you try to put on it.

Here, finally, is this generation's Neuromancer."

This is a work of fiction.

Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.

Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

Published in the United States by Crown Publishers, an imprint of the Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.

CROWN and the Crown colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.

Cline, Ernest.

Ready player one : a novel / Ernest Cline.-1st ed.

p.

cm.

1.

Regression (Civilization)-Fiction.

2.

Virtual reality-Fiction.

3.

Utopias- Fiction.

4.

Puzzles-Fiction.

I.

Title.

PS3603.L548R43 2011 813.6-dc22 2011015247 Jacket design by Christopher Brand v3.1 For Susan and Libby Because there is no map for where we are going Contents Cover Title Page Prologue Level One Level Two Level Three Acknowledgments About the Author Everyone my age remembers where they were and what they were doing when they first heard about the contest.

I was sitting in my hideout watching cartoons when the news bulletin broke in on my video feed, announcing that James Halliday had died during the night.

I'd heard of Halliday, of course.

Everyone had.

He was the videogame designer responsible for creating the OASIS, a massively multiplayer online game that had gradually evolved into the globally networked virtual reality most of humanity now used on a daily basis.

The unprecedented success of the OASIS had made Halliday one of the wealthiest people in the world.

At first, I couldn't understand why the media was making such a big deal of the billionaire's death.

After all, the people of Planet Earth had other concerns.

The ongoing energy crisis.

Catastrophic climate change.

Widespread famine, poverty, and disease.

Half a dozen wars.

You know: "dogs and cats living together ...

mass hysteria!"

Normally, the newsfeeds didn't interrupt everyone's interactive sitcoms and soap operas unless something really major had happened.

Like the outbreak of some new killer virus, or another major city vanishing in a mushroom cloud.

Big stuff like that.

As famous as he was, Halliday's death should have warranted only a brief segment on the evening news, so the unwashed masses could shake their heads in envy when the newscasters announced the obscenely large amount of money that would be doled out to the rich man's heirs.

But that was the rub.

James Halliday had no heirs.

He had died a sixty-seven-year-old bachelor, with no living relatives and, by most accounts, without a single friend.

He'd spent the last fifteen years of his life in self-imposed isolation, during which time-if the rumors were to be believed -he'd gone completely insane.

So the real jaw-dropping news that January morning, the news that had everyone from Toronto to Tokyo crapping in their cornflakes, concerned the contents of Halliday's last will and testament, and the fate of his vast fortune.

Halliday had prepared a short video message, along with instructions that it be released to the world media at the time of his death.

He'd also arranged to have a copy of the video e-mailed to every single OASIS user that same morning.

I still remember hearing the familiar electronic chime when it arrived in my inbox, just a few seconds after I saw that first news bulletin.

His video message was actually a meticulously constructed short film titled Anorak's Invitation.

A famous eccentric, Halliday had harbored a lifelong obsession with the 1980s, the decade during which he'd been a teenager, and Anorak's Invitation was crammed with obscure '80s pop culture references, nearly all of which were lost on me the first time I viewed it.

The entire video was just over five minutes in length, and in the days and weeks that followed, it would become the most scrutinized piece of film in history, surpassing even the Zapruder film in the amount of painstaking frame- by-frame analysis devoted to it.

My entire generation would come to know every second of Halliday's message by heart.

Anorak's Invitation begins with the sound of trumpets, the opening of an old song called "Dead Man's Party."

The song plays over a dark screen for the first few seconds, until the trumpets are joined by a guitar, and that's when Halliday appears.

But he's not a sixty- seven-year-old man, ravaged by time and illness.

He looks just as he did on the cover of Time magazine back in 2014, a tall, thin, healthy man in his early forties, with unkempt hair and his trademark horn-rimmed eyeglasses.

He's also wearing the same clothing he wore in the Time cover photo: faded jeans and a vintage Space Invaders T-shirt.

Halliday is at a high-school dance being held in a large gymnasium.

He's surrounded by teenagers whose clothing, hairstyles, and dance moves all indicate that the time period is the late 1980s.* Halliday is dancing, too-something no one ever saw him do in real life.

Grinning maniacally, he spins in rapid circles, swinging his arms and head in time with the song, flawlessly cycling through several signature '80s dance moves.

But Halliday has no dance partner.

He is, as the saying goes, dancing with himself.

A few lines of text appear briefly at the lower left-hand corner of the screen, listing the name of the band, the song's title, the record label, and the year of release, as if this were an old music video airing on MTV: Oingo Boingo, "Dead Man's Party,"

MCA Records, 1985.

When the lyrics kick in, Halliday begins to lip-synch along, still gyrating: "All dressed up with nowhere to go.

Walking with a dead man over my shoulder.

Don't run away, it's only me...."

He abruptly stops dancing and makes a cutting motion with his right hand, silencing the music.

At the same moment, the dancers and the gymnasium behind him vanish, and the scene around him suddenly changes.

Halliday now stands at the front of a funeral parlor, next to an open casket. A second, much older Halliday lies inside the casket, his body emaciated and ravaged by cancer.

Shiny quarters cover each of his eyelids. The younger Halliday gazes down at the corpse of his older self with mock sadness, then turns to address the assembled mourners. Halliday snaps his fingers and a scroll appears in his right hand.

He opens it with a flourish and it unfurls to the floor, unraveling down the aisle in front of him.

He breaks the fourth wall, addressing the viewer, and begins to read.

"I, James Donovan Halliday, being of sound mind and disposing memory, do hereby make, publish, and declare this instrument to be my last will and testament, hereby revoking any and all wills and codicils by me at any time heretofore made...."

He continues reading, faster and faster, plowing through several more paragraphs of legalese, until he's speaking so rapidly that the words are unintelligible.

Then he stops abruptly.

"Forget it,"

he says.

"Even at that speed, it would take me a month to read the whole thing.

Sad to say, I don't have that kind of time."

He drops the scroll and it vanishes in a shower of gold dust.

"Let me just give you the highlights."

The funeral parlor vanishes, and the scene changes once again.

Halliday now stands in front of an immense bank vault door.

"My entire estate, including a controlling share of stock in my company, Gregarious Simulation Systems, is to be placed in escrow until such time as a single condition I have set forth in my will is met.

The first individual to meet that condition will inherit my entire fortune, currently valued in excess of two hundred and forty billion dollars."

The vault door swings open and Halliday walks inside.

The interior of the vault is enormous, and it contains a huge stack of gold bars, roughly the size of a large house.

"Here's the dough I'm putting up for grabs,"

Halliday says, grinning broadly.

"What the hell.

You can't take it with you, right?"

Halliday leans against the stack of gold bars, and the camera pulls in tight on his face.

"Now, I'm sure you're wondering, what do you have to do to get your hands on all this moolah?

Well, hold your horses, kids.

I'm getting to that...."

He pauses dramatically, his expression changing to that of a child about to reveal a very big secret.

Halliday snaps his fingers again and the vault disappears.

In the same instant, Halliday shrinks and morphs into a small boy wearing brown corduroys and a faded The Muppet Show T-shirt.* The young Halliday stands in a cluttered living room with burnt orange carpeting, wood-paneled walls, and kitschy late-'70s decor.

A 21-inch Zenith television sits nearby, with an Atari 2600 game console hooked up to it.

"This was the first videogame system I ever owned,"

Halliday says, now in a child's voice.

"An Atari 2600.

I got it for Christmas in 1979."

He plops down in front of the Atari, picks up a joystick, and begins to play.

"My favorite game was this one,"

he says, nodding at the TV screen, where a small square is traveling through a series of simple mazes.

"It was called Adventure.

Like many early videogames, Adventure was designed and programmed by just one person.

But back then, Atari refused to give its programmers credit for their work, so the name of a game's creator didn't actually appear anywhere on the packaging."

On the TV screen, we see Halliday use a sword to slay a red dragon, although due to the game's crude low-resolution graphics, this looks more like a square using an arrow to stab a deformed duck.

"So the guy who created Adventure, a man named Warren Robinett, decided to hide his name inside the game itself.

He hid a key in one of the game's labyrinths.

If you found this key, a small pixel-sized gray dot, you could use it to enter a secret room where Robinett had hidden his name."

On the TV, Halliday guides his square protagonist into the game's secret room, where the words CREATED BY WARREN ROBINETT appear in the center of the screen.

"This,"

Halliday says, pointing to the screen with genuine reverence, "was the very first videogame Easter egg.

Robinett hid it in his game's code without telling a soul, and Atari manufactured and shipped Adventure all over the world without knowing about the secret room.

They didn't find out about the Easter egg's existence until a few months later, when kids all over the world began to discover it.

I was one of those kids, and finding Robinett's Easter egg for the first time was one of the coolest videogaming experiences of my life."

The young Halliday drops his joystick and stands.

As he does, the living room fades away, and the scene shifts again.

Halliday now stands in a dim cavern, where light from unseen torches flickers off the damp walls.

In the same instant, Halliday's appearance also changes once again, as he morphs into his famous OASIS avatar, Anorak-a tall, robed wizard with a slightly more handsome version of the adult Halliday's face (minus the eyeglasses).

Anorak is dressed in his trademark black robes, with his avatar's emblem (a large calligraphic letter "A") embroidered on each sleeve.

"Before I died,"

Anorak says, speaking in a much deeper voice, "I created my own Easter egg, and hid it somewhere inside my most popular videogame-the OASIS.

The first person to find my Easter egg will inherit my entire fortune."

Another dramatic pause.

"The egg is well hidden.

I didn't just leave it lying under a rock somewhere.

I suppose you could say that it's locked inside a safe that is buried in a secret room that lies hidden at the center of a maze located somewhere"-he reaches up to tap his right temple-"up here.

"But don't worry.

I've left a few clues lying around to get everyone started.

And here's the first one."

Anorak makes a grand gesture with his right hand, and three keys appear, spinning slowly in the air in front of him.

They appear to be made of copper, jade, and clear crystal.

As the keys continue to spin, Anorak recites a piece of verse, and as he speaks each line, it appears briefly in flaming subtitles across the bottom of screen: Three hidden keys open three secret gates Wherein the errant will be tested for worthy traits And those with the skill to survive these straits Will reach The End where the prize awaits As he finishes, the jade and crystal keys vanish, leaving only the copper key, which now hangs on a chain around Anorak's neck.

The camera follows Anorak as he turns and continues farther into the dark cavern.

A few seconds later, he arrives at a pair of massive wooden doors set into the cavern's rocky wall.

These doors are banded with steel, and there are shields and dragons carved into their surfaces.

"I couldn't playtest this particular game, so I worry that I may have hidden my Easter egg a little too well.

Made it too difficult to reach.

I'm not sure.

If that's the case, it's too late to change anything now.

So I guess we'll see."

Anorak throws open the double doors, revealing an immense treasure room filled with piles of glittering gold coins and jewel-encrusted goblets.* Then he steps into the open doorway and turns to face the viewer, stretching out his arms to hold open the giant double doors. "So without further ado,"

Anorak announces, "let the hunt for Halliday's Easter egg begin!"

Then he vanishes in a flash of light, leaving the viewer to gaze through the open doorway at the glittering mounds of treasure that lay beyond.

Then the screen fades to black.

At the end of the video, Halliday included a link to his personal website, which had changed drastically on the morning of his death.

For over a decade, the only thing posted there had been a short looping animation that showed his avatar, Anorak, sitting in a medieval library, hunched over a scarred worktable, mixing potions and poring over dusty spellbooks, with a large painting of a black dragon visible on the wall behind him.

But now that animation was gone, and in its place there was a high-score list like those that used to appear in old coin-operated videogames.

The list had ten numbered spots, and each displayed the initials JDH-James Donovan Halliday -followed by a score of six zeros.

This high-score list quickly came to be known as "the Scoreboard."

Just below the Scoreboard was an icon that looked like a small leather-bound book, which linked to a free downloadable copy of Anorak's Almanac, a collection of hundreds of Halliday's undated journal entries.

The Almanac was over a thousand pages long, but it contained few details about Halliday's personal life or his day-to-day activities.

Most of the entries were his stream-of- consciousness observations on various classic videogames, science-fiction and fantasy novels, movies, comic books, and '80s pop culture, mixed with humorous diatribes denouncing everything from organized religion to diet soda.

The Hunt, as the contest came to be known, quickly wove its way into global culture.

Like winning the lottery, finding Halliday's Easter egg became a popular fantasy among adults and children alike.

It was a game anyone could play, and at first, there seemed to be no right or wrong way to play it.

The only thing Anorak's Almanac seemed to indicate was that a familiarity with Halliday's various obsessions would be essential to finding the egg.

This led to a global fascination with 1980s pop culture.

Fifty years after the decade had ended, the movies, music, games, and fashions of the 1980s were all the rage once again.

By 2041, spiked hair and acid-washed jeans were back in style, and covers of hit '80s pop songs by contemporary bands dominated the music charts.

People who had actually been teenagers in the 1980s, all now approaching old age, had the strange experience of seeing the fads and fashions of their youth embraced and studied by their grandchildren.

A new subculture was born, composed of the millions of people who now devoted every free moment of their lives to searching for Halliday's egg.

At first, these individuals were known simply as "egg hunters,"

but this was quickly truncated to the nickname "gunters."

During the first year of the Hunt, being a gunter was highly fashionable, and nearly every OASIS user claimed to be one.

When the first anniversary of Halliday's death arrived, the fervor surrounding the contest began to die down.

An entire year had passed and no one had found anything.

Not a single key or gate.

Part of the problem was the sheer size of the OASIS.

It contained thousands of simulated worlds where the keys might be hidden, and it could take a gunter years to conduct a thorough search of any one of them.

Despite all of the "professional"

gunters who boasted on their blogs that they were getting closer to a breakthrough every day, the truth gradually became apparent: No one really even knew exactly what it was they were looking for, or where to start looking for it.

Another year passed.

And another.

Still nothing.

The general public lost all interest in the contest.

People began to assume it was all just an outlandish hoax perpetrated by a rich nut job.

Others believed that even if the egg really did exist, no one was ever going to find it.

Meanwhile, the OASIS continued to evolve and grow in popularity, protected from takeover attempts and legal challenges by the ironclad terms of Halliday's will and the army of rabid lawyers he had tasked with administering his estate.

Halliday's Easter egg gradually moved into the realm of urban legend, and the ever-dwindling tribe of gunters gradually became the object of ridicule.

Each year, on the anniversary of Halliday's death, newscasters jokingly reported on their continued lack of progress.

And each year, more gunters called it quits, concluding that Halliday had indeed made the egg impossible to find.

And another year went by.

And another.

Then, on the evening of February 11, 2045, an avatar's name appeared at the top of the Scoreboard, for the whole world to see.

After five long years, the Copper Key had finally been found, by an eighteen-year-old kid living in a trailer park on the outskirts of Oklahoma City.

That kid was me.

Dozens of books, cartoons, movies, and miniseries have attempted to tell the story of everything that happened next, but every single one of them got it wrong.

So I want to set the record straight, once and for all.

* Careful analysis of this scene reveals that all of the teenagers behind Halliday are actually extras from various John Hughes teen films who have been digitally cut-and-pasted into the video.

 His surroundings are actually from a scene in the 1989 film Heathers.

Halliday appears to have digitally re-created the funeral parlor set and then inserted himself into it.

 High-resolution scrutiny reveals that both quarters were minted in 1984.

 The mourners are actually all actors and extras from the same funeral scene in Heathers.

Winona Ryder and Christian Slater are clearly visible in the audience, sitting near the back.

* Halliday now looks exactly as he did in a school photo taken in 1980, when he was eight years old.

* Analysis reveals dozens of curious items hidden among the mounds of treasure, most notably: several early home computers (an Apple IIe, a Commodore 64, an Atari 800XL, and a TRS-80 Color Computer 2), dozens of videogame controllers for a variety of game systems, and hundreds of polyhedral dice like those used in old tabletop role-playing games.

 A freeze-frame of this scene appears nearly identical to a painting by Jeff Easley that appeared on the cover of the Dungeon Master's Guide, a Dungeons & Dragons rulebook published in 1983.

Being human totally sucks most of the time.

Videogames are the only thing that make life bearable.

I was jolted awake by the sound of gunfire in one of the neighboring stacks.

The shots were followed by a few minutes of muffled shouting and screaming, then silence.

Gunfire wasn't uncommon in the stacks, but it still shook me up.

I knew I probably wouldn't be able to fall back asleep, so I decided to kill the remaining hours until dawn by brushing up on a few coin-op classics.

Galaga, Defender, Asteroids.

These games were outdated digital dinosaurs that had become museum pieces long before I was born.

But I was a gunter, so I didn't think of them as quaint low-res antiques.

To me, they were hallowed artifacts.

Pillars of the pantheon.

When I played the classics, I did so with a determined sort of reverence.

I was curled up in an old sleeping bag in the corner of the trailer's tiny laundry room, wedged into the gap between the wall and the dryer.

I wasn't welcome in my aunt's room across the hall, which was fine by me.

I preferred to crash in the laundry room anyway.

It was warm, it afforded me a limited amount of privacy, and the wireless reception wasn't too bad.

And, as an added bonus, the room smelled like liquid detergent and fabric softener.

The rest of the trailer reeked of cat piss and abject poverty.

Most of the time I slept in my hideout.

But the temperature had dropped below zero the past few nights, and as much as I hated staying at my aunt's place, it still beat freezing to death.

A total of fifteen people lived in my aunt's trailer.

She slept in the smallest of its three bedrooms.

The Depperts lived in the bedroom adjacent to hers, and the Millers occupied the large master bedroom at the end of the hall.

There were six of them, and they paid the largest share of the rent.

Our trailer wasn't as crowded as some of the other units in the stacks.

It was a double-wide.

Plenty of room for everybody.

I pulled out my laptop and powered it on.

It was a bulky, heavy beast, almost ten years old.

I'd found it in a trash bin behind the abandoned strip mall across the highway.

I'd been able to coax it back to life by replacing its system memory and reloading the stone-age operating system.

The processor was slower than a sloth by current standards, but it was fine for my needs.

The laptop served as my portable research library, video arcade, and home theater system.

Its hard drive was filled with old books, movies, TV show episodes, song files, and nearly every videogame made in the twentieth century.

I booted up my emulator and selected Robotron: 2084, one of my all-time favorite games.

I'd always loved its frenetic pace and brutal simplicity.

Robotron was all about instinct and reflexes.

Playing old videogames never failed to clear my mind and set me at ease.

If I was feeling depressed or frustrated about my lot in life, all I had to do was tap the Player One button, and my worries would instantly slip away as my mind focused itself on the relentless pixelated onslaught on the screen in front of me.

There, inside the game's two-dimensional universe, life was simple: It's just you against the machine.

Move with your left hand, shoot with your right, and try to stay alive as long as possible.

I spent a few hours blasting through wave after wave of Brains, Spheroids, Quarks, and Hulks in my unending battle to Save the Last Human Family!

But eventually my fingers started to cramp up and I began to lose my rhythm.

When that happened at this level, things deteriorated quickly.

I burned through all of my extra lives in a matter of minutes, and my two least-favorite words appeared on the screen: GAME OVER.

I shut down the emulator and began to browse through my video files.

Over the past five years, I'd downloaded every single movie, TV show, and cartoon mentioned in Anorak's Almanac.

I still hadn't watched all of them yet, of course.

That would probably take decades.

I selected an episode of Family Ties, an '80s sitcom about a middleclass family living in central Ohio.

I'd downloaded the show because it had been one of Halliday's favorites, and I figured there was a chance that some clue related to the Hunt might be hidden in one of the episodes.

I'd become addicted to the show immediately, and had now watched all 180 episodes, multiple times.

I never seemed to get tired of them.

Sitting alone in the dark, watching the show on my laptop, I always found myself imagining that I lived in that warm, well-lit house, and that those smiling, understanding people were my family.

That there was nothing so wrong in the world that we couldn't sort it out by the end of a single half-hour episode (or maybe a two-parter, if it was something really serious).

My own home life had never even remotely resembled the one depicted in Family Ties, which was probably why I loved the show so much.

I was the only child of two teenagers, both refugees who'd met in the stacks where I'd grown up.

I don't remember my father.

When I was just a few months old, he was shot dead while looting a grocery store during a power blackout.

The only thing I really knew about him was that he loved comic books.

I'd found several old flash drives in a box of his things, containing complete runs of The Amazing Spider-Man, The X-Men, and Green Lantern.

My mom once told me that my dad had given me an alliterative name, Wade Watts, because he thought it sounded like the secret identity of a superhero.

Like Peter Parker or Clark Kent.

Knowing that made me think he must have been a cool guy, despite how he'd died.

My mother, Loretta, had raised me on her own.

We'd lived in a small RV in another part of the stacks.

She had two full-time OASIS jobs, one as a telemarketer, the other as an escort in an online brothel.

She used to make me wear earplugs at night so I wouldn't hear her in the next room, talking dirty to tricks in other time zones.

But the earplugs didn't work very well, so I would watch old movies instead, with the volume turned way up.

I was introduced to the OASIS at an early age, because my mother used it as a virtual babysitter.

As soon as I was old enough to wear a visor and a pair of haptic gloves, my mom helped me create my first OASIS avatar.

Then she stuck me in a corner and went back to work, leaving me to explore an entirely new world, very different from the one I'd known up until then.

From that moment on, I was more or less raised by the OASIS's interactive educational programs, which any kid could access for free.

I spent a big chunk of my childhood hanging out in a virtual-reality simulation of Sesame Street, singing songs with friendly Muppets and playing interactive games that taught me how to walk, talk, add, subtract, read, write, and share.

Once I'd mastered those skills, it didn't take me long to discover that the OASIS was also the world's biggest public library, where even a penniless kid like me had access to every book ever written, every song ever recorded, and every movie, television show, videogame, and piece of artwork ever created.

The collected knowledge, art, and amusements of all human civilization were there, waiting for me.

But gaining access to all of that information turned out to be something of a mixed blessing.

Because that was when I found out the truth.

I don't know, maybe your experience differed from mine.

For me, growing up as a human being on the planet Earth in the twenty-first century was a real kick in the teeth.

Existentially speaking.

The worst thing about being a kid was that no one told me the truth about my situation.

In fact, they did the exact opposite.

And, of course, I believed them, because I was just a kid and I didn't know any better.

I mean, Christ, my brain hadn't even grown to full size yet, so how could I be expected to know when the adults were bullshitting me?

So I swallowed all of the dark ages nonsense they fed me.

Some time passed.

I grew up a little, and I gradually began to figure out that pretty much everyone had been lying to me about pretty much everything since the moment I emerged from my mother's womb.

This was an alarming revelation.

It gave me trust issues later in life.

I started to figure out the ugly truth as soon as I began to explore the free OASIS libraries.

The facts were right there waiting for me, hidden in old books written by people who weren't afraid to be honest.

Artists and scientists and philosophers and poets, many of them long dead.

As I read the words they'd left behind, I finally began to get a grip on the situation.

My situation.

Our situation.

What most people referred to as "the human condition."

It was not good news.

I wish someone had just told me the truth right up front, as soon as I was old enough to understand it.

I wish someone had just said: "Here's the deal, Wade.

You're something called a 'human being.' That's a really smart kind of animal.

Like every other animal on this planet, we're descended from a single-celled organism that lived millions of years ago.

This happened by a process called evolution, and you'll learn more about it later.

But trust me, that's really how we all got here.

There's proof of it everywhere, buried in the rocks.

That story you heard?

About how we were all created by a super- powerful dude named God who lives up in the sky?

Total bullshit.

The whole God thing is actually an ancient fairy tale that people have been telling one another for thousands of years.

We made it all up.

Like Santa Claus and the Easter Bunny.

"Oh, and by the way ...

there's no Santa Claus or Easter Bunny.

Also bullshit.

Sorry, kid.

Deal with it.

"You're probably wondering what happened before you got here.

An awful lot of stuff, actually.

Once we evolved into humans, things got pretty interesting.

We figured out how to grow food and domesticate animals so we didn't have to spend all of our time hunting.

Our tribes got much bigger, and we spread across the entire planet like an unstoppable virus.

Then, after fighting a bunch of wars with each other over land, resources, and our made-up gods, we eventually got all of our tribes organized into a 'global civilization.' But, honestly, it wasn't all that organized, or civilized, and we continued to fight a lot of wars with each other.

But we also figured out how to do science, which helped us develop technology.

For a bunch of hairless apes, we've actually managed to invent some pretty incredible things.

Computers.

Medicine.

Lasers.

Microwave ovens.

Artificial hearts.

Atomic bombs.

We even sent a few guys to the moon and brought them back.

We also created a global communications network that lets us all talk to each other, all around the world, all the time.

Pretty impressive, right?

"But that's where the bad news comes in.

Our global civilization came at a huge cost.

We needed a whole bunch of energy to build it, and we got that energy by burning fossil fuels, which came from dead plants and animals buried deep in the ground.

We used up most of this fuel before you got here, and now it's pretty much all gone.

This means that we no longer have enough energy to keep our civilization running like it was before.

So we've had to cut back.

Big- time.

We call this the Global Energy Crisis, and it's been going on for a while now.

"Also, it turns out that burning all of those fossil fuels had some nasty side effects, like raising the temperature of our planet and screwing up the environment.

So now the polar ice caps are melting, sea levels are rising, and the weather is all messed up.

Plants and animals are dying off in record numbers, and lots of people are starving and homeless.

And we're still fighting wars with each other, mostly over the few resources we have left.

"Basically, kid, what this all means is that life is a lot tougher than it used to be, in the Good Old Days, back before you were born.

Things used to be awesome, but now they're kinda terrifying.

To be honest, the future doesn't look too bright.

You were born at a pretty crappy time in history.

And it looks like things are only gonna get worse from here on out.

Human civilization is in 'decline.' Some people even say it's 'collapsing.' "You're probably wondering what's going to happen to you.

That's easy.

The same thing is going to happen to you that has happened to every other human being who has ever lived.

You're going to die.

We all die.

That's just how it is.

"What happens when you die?

Well, we're not completely sure.

But the evidence seems to suggest that nothing happens.

You're just dead, your brain stops working, and then you're not around to ask annoying questions anymore.

Those stories you heard?

About going to a wonderful place called 'heaven' where there is no more pain or death and you live forever in a state of perpetual happiness?

Also total bullshit.

Just like all that God stuff.

There's no evidence of a heaven and there never was.

We made that up too.

Wishful thinking.

So now you have to live the rest of your life knowing you're going to die someday and disappear forever.

"Sorry."

OK, on second thought, maybe honesty isn't the best policy after all.

Maybe it isn't a good idea to tell a newly arrived human being that he's been born into a world of chaos, pain, and poverty just in time to watch everything fall to pieces.

I discovered all of that gradually over several years, and it still made me feel like jumping off a bridge.

Luckily, I had access to the OASIS, which was like having an escape hatch into a better reality.

The OASIS kept me sane.

It was my playground and my preschool, a magical place where anything was possible.

The OASIS is the setting of all my happiest childhood memories.

When my mom didn't have to work, we would log in at the same time and play games or go on interactive storybook adventures together.

She used to have to force me to log out every night, because I never wanted to return to the real world.

Because the real world sucked.

I never blamed my mom for the way things were.

She was a victim of fate and cruel circumstance, like everyone else.

Her generation had it the hardest.

She'd been born into a world of plenty, then had to watch it all slowly vanish.

More than anything, I remember feeling sorry for her.

She was depressed all the time, and taking drugs seemed to be the only thing she truly enjoyed.

Of course, they were what eventually killed her.

When I was eleven years old, she shot a bad batch of something into her arm and died on our ratty fold-out sofa bed while listening to music on an old mp3 player I'd repaired and given to her the previous Christmas.

That was when I had to move in with my mom's sister, Alice.

Aunt Alice didn't take me in out of kindness or familial responsibility.

She did it to get the extra food vouchers from the government every month.

Most of the time, I had to find food on my own.

This usually wasn't a problem, because I had a talent for finding and fixing old computers and busted OASIS consoles, which I sold to pawnshops or traded for food vouchers.

I earned enough to keep from going hungry, which was more than a lot of my neighbors could say.

The year after my mom died, I spent a lot of time wallowing in self-pity and despair.

I tried to look on the bright side, to remind myself that, orphaned or not, I was still better off than most of the kids in Africa.

And Asia.

And North America, too.

I'd always had a roof over my head and more than enough food to eat.

And I had the OASIS.

My life wasn't so bad.

At least that's what I kept telling myself, in a vain attempt to stave off the epic loneliness I now felt.

Then the Hunt for Halliday's Easter egg began.

That was what saved me, I think.

Suddenly I'd found something worth doing.

A dream worth chasing.

For the last five years, the Hunt had given me a goal and purpose.

A quest to fulfill.

A reason to get up in the morning.

Something to look forward to.

The moment I began searching for the egg, the future no longer seemed so bleak.

I was halfway through the fourth episode of my Family Ties mini-marathon when the laundry room door creaked open and my aunt Alice walked in, a malnourished harpy in a housecoat, clutching a basket of dirty clothes.

She looked more lucid than usual, which was bad news.

She was much easier to deal with when she was high.

She glanced over at me with the usual look of disdain and started to load her clothes into the washer.

Then her expression changed and she peeked around the dryer to get a better look at me.

Her eyes went wide when she spotted my laptop.

I quickly closed it and began to shove it into my backpack, but I knew it was already too late.

"Hand it over, Wade,"

she ordered, reaching for the laptop.

"I can pawn it to help pay our rent."

"No!"

I shouted, twisting away from her.

"Come on, Aunt Alice.

I need it for school."

"What you need is to show some gratitude!"

she barked.

"Everyone else around here has to pay rent.

I'm tired of you leeching off of me!"

"You keep all of my food vouchers.

That more than covers my share of the rent."

"The hell it does!"

She tried again to grab the laptop out of my hands, but I refused to let go of it.

So she turned and stomped back to her room.

I knew what was coming next, so I quickly entered a command on my laptop that locked its keyboard and erased the hard drive.

Aunt Alice returned a few seconds later with her boyfriend, Rick, who was still half-asleep.

Rick was perpetually shirtless, because he liked to show off his impressive collection of prison tattoos.

Without saying a word, he walked over and raised a fist at me threateningly.

I flinched and handed over the laptop.

Then he and Aunt Alice walked out, already discussing how much the computer might fetch at a pawnshop.

Losing the laptop wasn't a big deal.

I had two spares stowed in my hideout.

But they weren't nearly as fast, and I would have to reload all of my media onto them from backup drives.

A total pain in the ass.

But it was my own fault.

I knew the risk of bringing anything of value back here.

The dark blue light of dawn was starting to creep in through the laundry room window.

I decided it might be a good idea to leave for school a little early today.

I dressed as quickly and quietly as possible, pulling on the worn corduroys, baggy sweater, and oversize coat that comprised my entire winter wardrobe.

Then I put on my backpack and climbed up onto the washing machine.

After pulling on my gloves, I slid open the frost-covered window.

The arctic morning air stung my cheeks as I gazed out over the uneven sea of trailer rooftops.

My aunt's trailer was the top unit in a "stack"

twenty-two mobile homes high, making it a level or two taller than the majority of the stacks immediately surrounding it.

The trailers on the bottom level rested on the ground, or on their original concrete foundations, but the units stacked above them were suspended on a reinforced modular scaffold, a haphazard metal latticework that had been constructed piecemeal over the years.

We lived in the Portland Avenue Stacks, a sprawling hive of discolored tin shoeboxes rusting on the shores of I-40, just west of Oklahoma City's decaying skyscraper core.

It was a collection of over five hundred individual stacks, all connected to each other by a makeshift network of recycled pipes, girders, support beams, and footbridges.

The spires of a dozen ancient construction cranes (used to do the actual stacking) were positioned around the stacks' ever- expanding outer perimeter.

The top level or "roof"

of the stacks was blanketed with a patchwork array of old solar panels that provided supplemental power to the units below.

A bundle of hoses and corrugated tubing snaked up and down the side of each stack, supplying water to each trailer and carrying away sewage (luxuries not available in some of the other stacks scattered around the city).

Very little sunlight made it to the bottom level (known as the "floor").

The dark, narrow strips of ground between the stacks were clogged with the skeletons of abandoned cars and trucks, their gas tanks emptied and their exit routes blocked off long ago.

One of our neighbors, Mr.

Miller, once explained to me that trailer parks like ours had originally consisted of a few dozen mobile homes arranged in neat rows on the ground.

But after the oil crash and the onset of the energy crisis, large cities had been flooded with refugees from surrounding suburban and rural areas, resulting in a massive urban housing shortage.

Real estate within walking distance of a big city became far too valuable to waste on a flat plane of mobile homes, so someone had cooked up the brilliant idea of, as Mr.

Miller put it, "stacking the sumbitches,"

to maximize the use of ground space.

The idea caught on in a big way, and trailer parks across the country had quickly evolved into "stacks"

like this one-strange hybrids of shantytowns, squatter settlements, and refugee camps.

They were now scattered around the outskirts of most major cities, each one overflowing with uprooted rednecks like my parents, who- desperate for work, food, electricity, and reliable OASIS access-had fled their dying small towns and had used the last of their gasoline (or their beasts of burden) to haul their families, RVs, and trailer homes to the nearest metropolis.

Every stack in our park stood at least fifteen mobile homes high (with the occasional RV, shipping container, Airstream trailer, or VW microbus mixed in for variety).

In recent years, many of the stacks had grown to a height of twenty units or more.

This made a lot of people nervous.

Stack collapses weren't that uncommon, and if the scaffold supports buckled at the wrong angle, the domino effect could bring down four or five of the neighboring stacks too.

Our trailer was near the northern edge of the stacks, which ran up to a crumbling highway overpass.

From my vantage point at the laundry room window, I could see a thin stream of electric vehicles crawling along the cracked asphalt, carrying goods and workers into the city.

As I stared out at the grim skyline, a bright sliver of the sun peeked over the horizon.

Watching it rise, I performed a mental ritual: Whenever I saw the sun, I reminded myself that I was looking at a star.

One of over a hundred billion stars in our galaxy.

A galaxy that was just one of billions of other galaxies in the observable universe.

This helped me keep things in perspective.

I'd started doing it after watching a science program from the early '80s called Cosmos.

I slipped out the window as quietly as possible and, clutching the bottom of the window frame, slid down the cold surface of the trailer's metal siding.

The steel platform on which the trailer rested was only slightly wider and longer than the trailer itself, leaving a ledge about a foot and a half wide all the way around.

I carefully lowered myself until my feet rested on this ledge, then reached up to close the window behind me.

I grabbed hold of a rope I'd strung there at waist level to serve as a handhold and began to sidestep along the ledge to the corner of the platform.

From there I was able to descend the ladderlike frame of the scaffolding.

I almost always took this route when leaving or returning to my aunt's trailer.

A rickety metal staircase was bolted to the side of the stack, but it shook and knocked against the scaffolding, so I couldn't use it without announcing my presence.

Bad news.

In the stacks, it was best to avoid being heard or seen, whenever possible.

There were often dangerous and desperate people about-the sort who would rob you, rape you, and then sell your organs on the black market.

Descending the network of metal girders had always reminded me of old platform videogames like Donkey Kong or BurgerTime.

I'd seized upon this idea a few years earlier when I coded my first Atari 2600 game (a gunter rite of passage, like a Jedi building his first lightsaber).

It was a Pitfall rip-off called The Stacks where you had to navigate through a vertical maze of trailers, collecting junk computers, snagging food-voucher power-ups, and avoiding meth addicts and pedophiles on your way to school.

My game was a lot more fun than the real thing.

As I climbed down, I paused next to the Airstream trailer three units below ours, where my friend Mrs.

Gilmore lived.

She was a sweet old lady in her mid- seventies, and she always seemed to get up ridiculously early.

I peeked in her window and saw her shuffling around in her kitchen, making breakfast.

She spotted me after a few seconds, and her eyes lit up.

"Wade!"

she said, cracking open her window.

"Good morning, my dear boy."

"Good morning, Mrs.

G,"

I said.

"I hope I didn't startle you."

"Not at all,"

she said.

She pulled her robe tight against the draft coming in the window.

"It's freezing out there!

Why don't you come in and have some breakfast?

I've got some soy bacon.

And these powdered eggs aren't too bad, if you put enough salt on them...."

"Thanks, but I can't this morning, Mrs.

G.

I have to get to school."

"All right.

Rain check, then."

She blew me a kiss and started to close the window.

"Try not to break your neck climbing around out there, OK, Spider- Man?"

"Will do.

See ya later, Mrs.

G."

I waved good-bye to her and continued my descent.

Mrs.

Gilmore was a total sweetheart.

She let me crash on her couch when I needed to, although it was hard for me to sleep there because of all her cats.

Mrs.

G was super-religious and spent most of her time in the OASIS, sitting in the congregation of one of those big online mega-churches, singing hymns, listening to sermons, and taking virtual tours of the Holy Land.

I fixed her ancient OASIS console whenever it went on the fritz, and in return, she answered my endless questions about what it had been like for her to grow up during the 1980s.

She knew the coolest bits of '80s trivia-stuff you couldn't learn from books or movies.

She was always praying for me too.

Trying her hardest to save my soul.

I never had the heart to tell her that I thought organized religion was a total crock.

It was a pleasant fantasy that gave her hope and kept her going-which was exactly what the Hunt was for me.

To quote the Almanac: "People who live in glass houses should shut the fuck up."

When I reached the bottom level, I jumped off the scaffold and dropped the few remaining feet to the ground.

My rubber boots crunched into the slush and frozen mud.

It was still pretty dark down here, so I took out my flashlight and headed east, weaving my way through the dark maze, doing my best to remain unseen while being careful to avoid tripping over a shopping cart, engine block, or one of the other pieces of junk littering the narrow alleys between the stacks.

I rarely saw anyone out at this time of the morning.

The commuter shuttles ran only a few times a day, so the residents lucky enough to have a job would already be waiting at the bus stop by the highway.

Most of them worked as day laborers in the giant factory farms that surrounded the city.

After walking about half a mile, I reached a giant mound of old cars and trucks piled haphazardly along the stacks' eastern perimeter.

Decades ago, the cranes had cleared the park of as many abandoned vehicles as possible, to make room for even more stacks, and they'd dumped them in huge piles like this one all around the settlement's perimeter.

Many of them were nearly as tall as the stacks themselves.

I walked to the edge of the pile, and after a quick glance around to make sure I wasn't being watched or followed, I turned sideways to squeeze through a gap between two crushed cars.

From there, I ducked, clambered, and sidestepped my way farther and farther into the ramshackle mountain of twisted metal, until I reached a small open space at the rear of a buried cargo van.

Only the rear third of the van was visible.

The rest was concealed by the other vehicles stacked on and around it.

Two overturned pickup trucks lay across the van's roof at different angles, but most of their weight was supported by the cars stacked on either side, creating a kind of protective arch that had prevented the van from being crushed by the mountain of vehicles piled above it.

I pulled out a chain I kept around my neck, on which there hung a single key.

In a stroke of luck, this key had still been hanging from the van's ignition when I'd first discovered it.

Many of these vehicles had been in working condition when they were abandoned.

Their owners had simply no longer been able to afford fuel for them, so they'd just parked them and walked away.

I pocketed my flashlight and unlocked the van's rear right door.

It opened about a foot and a half, giving me just enough room to squeeze inside.

I pulled the door closed behind me and locked it again.

The van's rear doors had no windows, so I was hunched over in total darkness for a second, until my fingers found the old power strip I'd duct-taped to the ceiling.

I flipped it on, and an old desk lamp flooded the tiny space with light.

The crumpled green roof of a compact car covered the crushed opening where the windshield had been, but the damage to the van's front end didn't extend beyond the cab.

The rest of the interior remained intact.

Someone had removed all of the van's seats (probably to use as furniture), leaving a small "room"

about four feet wide, four feet high, and nine feet long.

This was my hideout.

I'd discovered it four years earlier, while searching for discarded computer parts.

When I first opened the door and gazed into the van's darkened interior, I knew right away that I'd found something of immeasurable value: privacy.

This was a place no one else knew about, where I wouldn't have to worry about getting hassled or slapped around by my aunt or whatever loser she was currently dating.

I could keep my things here without worrying they'd be stolen.

And, most important, it was a place where I could access the OASIS in peace.

The van was my refuge.

My Batcave.

My Fortress of Solitude.

It was where I attended school, did my homework, read books, watched movies, and played videogames.

It was also where I conducted my ongoing quest to find Halliday's Easter egg.

I'd covered the walls, floor, and ceiling with Styrofoam egg cartons and pieces of carpeting in an effort to soundproof the van as much as possible.

Several cardboard boxes of busted laptops and computer parts sat in the corner, next to a rack of old car batteries and a modified exercise bike I'd rigged up as a recharger.

The only furniture was a folding lawn chair.

I dropped my backpack, shrugged off my coat, and hopped on the exercise bike.

Charging the batteries was usually the only physical exercise I got each day.

I pedaled until the meter said the batteries had a full charge, then sat down in my chair and switched on the small electric heater I kept beside it.

I pulled off my gloves and rubbed my hands in front of the filaments as they began to glow bright orange.

I couldn't leave the heater on for very long, or it would drain the batteries.

I opened the rat-proof metal box where I kept my food cache and took out some bottled water and a packet of powdered milk.

I mixed these together in a bowl, then dumped in a generous serving of Fruit Rocks cereal.

Once I'd wolfed it down, I retrieved an old plastic Star Trek lunch box I kept hidden under the van's crushed dashboard.

Inside were my school-issued OASIS console, haptic gloves, and visor.

These items were, by far, the most valuable things I owned.

Far too valuable to carry around with me.

I pulled on my elastic haptic gloves and flexed my fingers to make sure none of the joints was sticking.

Then I grabbed my OASIS console, a flat black rectangle about the size of a paperback book.

It had a wireless network antenna built into it, but the reception inside the van was for shit, since it was buried under a huge mound of dense metal.

So I'd rigged up an external antenna and mounted it on the hood of a car at the top of the junk pile.

The antenna cable snaked up through a hole I'd punched in the van's ceiling.

I plugged it into a port on the side of the console, then slipped on my visor.

It fit snugly around my eyes like a pair of swimmer's goggles, blocking out all external light.

Small earbuds extended from the visor's temples and automatically plugged themselves into my ears.

The visor also housed two built-in stereo voice microphones to pick up everything I said.

I powered on the console and initiated the log-in sequence.

I saw a brief flash of red as the visor scanned my retinas.

Then I cleared my throat and said my log- in pass phrase, being careful to enunciate: "You have been recruited by the Star League to defend the Frontier against Xur and the Ko-Dan Armada."

My pass phrase was also verified, along with my voice pattern, and then I was logged in.

The following text appeared, superimposed in the center of my virtual display: Identity verification successful.

Welcome to the OASIS, Parzival!

Login Completed: 07:53:21 OST-2.10.2045 As the text faded away, it was replaced by a short message, just three words long.

This message had been embedded in the log-in sequence by James Halliday himself, when he'd first programmed the OASIS, as an homage to the simulation's direct ancestors, the coin-operated videogames of his youth.

These three words were always the last thing an OASIS user saw before leaving the real world and entering the virtual one: READY PLAYER ONE My avatar materialized in front of my locker on the second floor of my high school-the exact spot where I'd been standing when I'd logged out the night before.

I glanced up and down the hallway.

My virtual surroundings looked almost (but not quite) real.

Everything inside the OASIS was beautifully rendered in three dimensions.

Unless you pulled focus and stopped to examine your surroundings more closely, it was easy to forget that everything you were seeing was computer-generated.

And that was with my crappy school-issued OASIS console.

I'd heard that if you accessed the simulation with a new state-of-the-art immersion rig, it was almost impossible to tell the OASIS from reality.

I touched my locker door and it popped open with a soft metallic click.

The inside was sparsely decorated.

A picture of Princess Leia posing with a blaster pistol.

A group photo of the members of Monty Python in their Holy Grail costumes.

James Halliday's Time magazine cover.

I reached up and tapped the stack of textbooks on the locker's top shelf and they vanished, then reappeared in my avatar's item inventory.

Aside from my textbooks, my avatar had only a few meager possessions: a flashlight, an iron shortsword, a small bronze shield, and a suit of banded leather armor.

These items were all nonmagical and of low quality, but they were the best I could afford.

Items in the OASIS had just as much value as things in the real world (sometimes more), and you couldn't pay for them with food vouchers.

The OASIS credit was the coin of the realm, and in these dark times, it was also one of the world's most stable currencies, valued higher than the dollar, pound, euro, or yen.

A small mirror was mounted inside my locker door, and I caught a glimpse of my virtual self as I closed it.

I'd designed my avatar's face and body to look, more or less, like my own.

My avatar had a slightly smaller nose than me, and he was taller.

And thinner.

And more muscular.

And he didn't have any teenage acne.

But aside from these minor details, we looked more or less identical.

The school's strictly enforced dress code required that all student avatars be human, and of the same gender and age as the student.

No giant two-headed hermaphrodite demon unicorn avatars were allowed.

Not on school grounds, anyway.

You could give your OASIS avatar any name you liked, as long as it was unique.

Meaning you had to pick a name that hadn't already been taken by someone else.

Your avatar's name was also your e-mail address and chat ID, so you wanted it to be cool and easy to remember.

Celebrities had been known to pay huge sums of money to buy an avatar name they wanted from a cyber- squatter who had already reserved it.

When I'd first created my OASIS account, I'd named my avatar Wade_the_Great.

After that, I kept changing it every few months, usually to something equally ridiculous.

But my avatar had now had the same name for over five years.

On the day the Hunt began, the day I'd decided to become a gunter, I'd renamed my avatar Parzival, after the knight of Arthurian legend who had found the Holy Grail.

The other more common spellings of that knight's name, Perceval and Percival, had already been taken by other users.

But I preferred the name Parzival, anyway.

I thought it had a nice ring to it.

People rarely used their real names online.

Anonymity was one of the major perks of the OASIS.

Inside the simulation, no one knew who you really were, unless you wanted them to.

Much of the OASIS's popularity and culture were built around this fact.

Your real name, fingerprints, and retinal patterns were stored in your OASIS account, but Gregarious Simulation Systems kept that information encrypted and confidential.

Even GSS's own employees couldn't look up an avatar's true identity.

Back when Halliday was still running the company, GSS had won the right to keep every OASIS user's identity private in a landmark Supreme Court ruling.

When I'd first enrolled in the OASIS public school system, I was required to give them my real name, avatar name, mailing address, and Social Security number.

That information was stored in my student profile, but only my principal had access to that.

None of my teachers or fellow students knew who I really was, and vice versa.

Students weren't allowed to use their avatar names while they were at school.

This was to prevent teachers from having to say ridiculous things like "Pimp_Grease, please pay attention!"

or "BigWang69, would you stand up and give us your book report?"

Instead, students were required to use their real first names, followed by a number, to differentiate them from other students with the same name.

When I enrolled, there were already two other students at my school with the first name Wade, so I'd been assigned the student ID of Wade3.

That name floated above my avatar's head whenever I was on school grounds.

The school bell rang and a warning flashed in the corner of my display, informing me that I had forty minutes until the start of first period.

I began to walk my avatar down the hall, using a series of subtle hand motions to control its movements and actions.

I could also use voice commands to move around, if my hands were otherwise occupied.

I strolled in the direction of my World History classroom, smiling and waving to the familiar faces I passed.

I was going to miss this place when I graduated in a few months.

I wasn't looking forward to leaving school.

I didn't have the money to attend college, not even one in the OASIS, and my grades weren't good enough for a scholarship.

My only plan after graduation was to become a full-time gunter.

I didn't have much choice.

Winning the contest was my one chance of escaping the stacks.

Unless I wanted to sign a five-year indenturement contract with some corporation, and that was about as appealing to me as rolling around in broken glass in my birthday suit.

As I continued down the hallway, other students began to materialize in front of their lockers, ghostly apparitions that rapidly solidified.

The sound of chattering teenagers began to echo up and down the corridor.

Before long, I heard an insult hurled in my direction.

"Hey, hey!

If it isn't Wade Three!"

I heard a voice shout.

I turned and saw Todd13, an obnoxious avatar I recognized from my Algebra II class.

He was standing with several of his friends.

"Great outfit, slick,"

he said.

"Where did you snag the sweet threads?"

My avatar was wearing a black T-shirt and blue jeans, one of the free default skins you could select when you created your account.

Like his Cro-Magnon friends, Todd13 wore an expensive designer skin, probably purchased in some offworld mall.

"Your mom bought them for me,"

I retorted without breaking my stride.

"Tell her I said thanks, the next time you stop at home to breast-feed and pick up your allowance."

Childish, I know.

But virtual or not, this was still high school-the more childish an insult, the more effective it was.

My jab elicited laughter from a few of his friends and the other students standing nearby.

Todd13 scowled and his face actually turned red-a sign that he hadn't bothered to turn off his account's real-time emotion feature, which made your avatar mirror your facial expressions and body language.

He was about to reply, but I muted him first, so I didn't hear what he said.

I just smiled and continued on my way.

The ability to mute my peers was one of my favorite things about attending school online, and I took advantage of it almost daily.

The best thing about it was that they could see that you'd muted them, and they couldn't do a damn thing about it.

There was never any fighting on school grounds.

The simulation simply didn't allow it.

The entire planet of Ludus was a no-PvP zone, meaning that no player-versus-player combat was permitted.

At this school, the only real weapons were words, so I'd become skilled at wielding them.

I'd attended school in the real world up until the sixth grade.

It hadn't been a very pleasant experience.

I was a painfully shy, awkward kid, with low self- esteem and almost no social skills-a side effect of spending most of my childhood inside the OASIS.

Online, I didn't have a problem talking to people or making friends.

But in the real world, interacting with other people-especially kids my own age-made me a nervous wreck.

I never knew how to act or what to say, and when I did work up the courage to speak, I always seemed to say the wrong thing.

My appearance was part of the problem.

I was overweight, and had been for as long as I could remember.

My bankrupt diet of government-subsidized sugar- and-starch-laden food was a contributing factor, but I was also an OASIS addict, so the only exercise I usually got back then was running away from bullies before and after school.

To make matters worse, my limited wardrobe consisted entirely of ill-fitting clothes from thrift stores and donation bins-the social equivalent of having a bull's-eye painted on my forehead.

Even so, I tried my best to fit in.

Year after year, my eyes would scan the lunchroom like a T-1000, searching for a clique that might accept me.

But even the other outcasts wanted nothing to do with me.

I was too weird, even for the weirdos.

And girls?

Talking to girls was out of the question.

To me, they were like some exotic alien species, both beautiful and terrifying.

Whenever I got near one of them, I invariably broke out in a cold sweat and lost the ability to speak in complete sentences.

For me, school had been a Darwinian exercise.

A daily gauntlet of ridicule, abuse, and isolation.

By the time I entered sixth grade, I was beginning to wonder if I'd be able to maintain my sanity until graduation, still six long years away.

Then, one glorious day, our principal announced that any student with a passing grade-point average could apply for a transfer to the new OASIS public school system.

The real public school system, the one run by the government, had been an underfunded, overcrowded train wreck for decades.

And now the conditions at many schools had gotten so terrible that every kid with half a brain was being encouraged to stay at home and attend school online.

I nearly broke my neck sprinting to the school office to submit my application.

It was accepted, and I transferred to OASIS Public School #1873 the following semester.

Prior to my transfer, my OASIS avatar had never left Incipio, the planet at the center of Sector One where new avatars were spawned at the time of their creation.

There wasn't much to do on Incipio except chat with other noobs or shop in one of the giant virtual malls that covered the planet.

If you wanted to go somewhere more interesting, you had to pay a teleportation fare to get there, and that cost money, something I didn't have.

So my avatar was stranded on Incipio.

That is, until my new school e-mailed me a teleportation voucher to cover the cost of my avatar's transport to Ludus, the planet where all of the OASIS public schools were located.

There were hundreds of school campuses here on Ludus, spread out evenly across the planet's surface.

The schools were all identical, because the same construction code was copied and pasted into a different location whenever a new school was needed.

And since the buildings were just pieces of software, their design wasn't limited by monetary constraints, or even by the laws of physics.

So every school was a grand palace of learning, with polished marble hallways, cathedral-like classrooms, zero-g gymnasiums, and virtual libraries containing every (school boardapproved) book ever written.

On my first day at OPS #1873, I thought I'd died and gone to heaven.

Now, instead of running a gauntlet of bullies and drug addicts on my walk to school each morning, I went straight to my hideout and stayed there all day.

Best of all, in the OASIS, no one could tell that I was fat, that I had acne, or that I wore the same shabby clothes every week.

Bullies couldn't pelt me with spitballs, give me atomic wedgies, or pummel me by the bike rack after school.

No one could even touch me.

In here, I was safe.

When I arrived in my World History classroom, several students were already seated at their desks.

Their avatars all sat motionless, with their eyes closed.

This was a signal that they were "engaged,"

meaning they were currently on phone calls, browsing the Web, or logged into chat rooms.

It was poor OASIS etiquette to try to talk to an engaged avatar.

They usually just ignored you, and you'd get an automated message telling you to piss off.

I took a seat at my desk and tapped the Engage icon at the edge of my display.

My own avatar's eyes slid shut, but I could still see my surroundings.

I tapped another icon, and a large two-dimensional Web browser window appeared, suspended in space directly in front of me.

Windows like this one were visible to only my avatar, so no one could read over my shoulder (unless I selected the option to allow it).

My homepage was set to the Hatchery, one of the more popular gunter message forums.

The Hatchery's site interface was designed to look and operate like an old pre-Internet dial-up bulletin board system, complete with the screech of a 300-baud modem during the log-in sequence.

Very cool.

I spent a few minutes scanning the most recent message threads, taking in the latest gunter news and rumors.

I rarely posted anything to the boards, even though I made sure to check them every day.

I didn't see much of interest this morning.

The usual gunter clan flame wars.

Ongoing arguments about the "correct"

interpretation of some cryptic passage in Anorak's Almanac.

High-level avatars bragging about some new magic item or artifact they'd obtained.

This crap had been going on for years now.

In the absence of any real progress, gunter subculture had become mired in bravado, bullshit, and pointless infighting.

It was sad, really.

My favorite message threads were those devoted to bashing the Sixers.

"Sixers"

was the derogatory nickname gunters had given to employees of Innovative Online Industries.

IOI (pronounced eye-oh-eye) was a global communications conglomerate and the world's largest Internet service provider.

A large portion of IOI's business centered around providing access to the OASIS and on selling goods and services inside it.

For this reason, IOI had attempted several hostile takeovers of Gregarious Simulation Systems, all of which had failed.

Now they were trying to seize control of GSS by exploiting a loophole in Halliday's will.

IOI had created a new department within the company that they called their "Oology Division."

("Oology"

was originally defined as "the science of studying birds' eggs,"

but in recent years it had taken on a second meaning: the "science"

of searching for Halliday's Easter egg.) IOI's Oology Division had but one purpose: to win Halliday's contest and seize control of his fortune, his company, and the OASIS itself.

Like most gunters, I was horrified at the thought of IOI taking control of the OASIS.

The company's PR machine had made its intentions crystal clear.

IOI believed that Halliday never properly monetized his creation, and they wanted to remedy that.

They would start charging a monthly fee for access to the simulation.

They would plaster advertisements on every visible surface.

User anonymity and free speech would become things of the past.

The moment IOI took it over, the OASIS would cease to be the open-source virtual utopia I'd grown up in.

It would become a corporate-run dystopia, an overpriced theme park for wealthy elitists.

IOI required its egg hunters, which it referred to as "oologists,"

to use their employee numbers as their OASIS avatar names.

These numbers were all six digits in length, and they also began with the numeral "6,"

so everyone began calling them the Sixers.

These days, most gunters referred to them as "the Sux0rz."

(Because they sucked.) To become a Sixer, you had to sign a contract stipulating, among other things, that if you found Halliday's egg, the prize would become the sole property of your employer.

In return, IOI gave you a bimonthly paycheck, food, lodging, health-care benefits, and a retirement plan.

The company also provided your avatar with high-end armor, vehicles, and weapons, and covered all of your teleportation fares.

Joining the Sixers was a lot like joining the military.

Sixers weren't hard to spot, because they all looked identical.

They were all required to use the same hulking male avatar (regardless of the operator's true gender), with close-cropped dark hair and facial features left at the system default settings.

And they all wore the same navy blue uniform.

The only way to tell these corporate drones apart was by checking the six-digit employee number stamped on their right breast, just beneath the IOI corporate logo.

Like most gunters, I loathed the Sixers and was disgusted by their very existence.

By hiring an army of contract egg hunters, IOI was perverting the entire spirit of the contest.

Of course, it could be argued that all the gunters who had joined clans were doing the same thing.

There were now hundreds of gunter clans, some with thousands of members, all working together to find the egg.

Each clan was bound by an ironclad legal agreement stating that if one clan member won the contest, all members would share the prize.

Solos like me didn't care much for the clans, either, but we still respected them as fellow gunters-unlike the Sixers, whose goal was to hand the OASIS over to an evil multinational conglomerate intent on ruining it.

My generation had never known a world without the OASIS.

To us, it was much more than a game or an entertainment platform.

It had been an integral part of our lives for as far back as we could remember.

We'd been born into an ugly world, and the OASIS was our one happy refuge.

The thought of the simulation being privatized and homogenized by IOI horrified us in a way that those born before its introduction found difficult to understand.

For us, it was like someone threatening to take away the sun, or charge a fee to look up at the sky.

The Sixers gave gunters a common enemy, and Sixer bashing was a favorite pastime in our forums and chat rooms.

A lot of high-level gunters had a strict policy of killing (or trying to kill) every Sixer who crossed their path.

Several websites were devoted to tracking Sixer activities and movements, and some gunters spent more time hunting the Sixers than they did searching for the egg.

The bigger clans actually held a yearly competition called "Eighty-Six the Sux0rz,"

with a prize for the clan who managed to kill the largest number of them.

After checking a few other gunter forums, I tapped a bookmark icon for one of my favorite websites, Arty's Missives, the blog of a female gunter named Art3mis (pronounced "Artemis").

I'd discovered it about three years ago and had been a loyal reader ever since.

She posted these great rambling essays about her search for Halliday's egg, which she called a "maddening MacGuffin hunt."

She wrote with an endearing, intelligent voice, and her entries were filled with self- deprecating humor and witty, sardonic asides.

In addition to posting her (often hysterical) interpretations of passages in the Almanac, she also linked to the books, movies, TV shows, and music she was currently studying as part of her Halliday research.

I assumed that all of these posts were filled with misdirection and misinformation, but they were still highly entertaining.

It probably goes without saying that I had a massive cyber-crush on Art3mis.

She occasionally posted screenshots of her raven-haired avatar, and I sometimes (always) saved them to a folder on my hard drive.

Her avatar had a pretty face, but it wasn't unnaturally perfect.

In the OASIS, you got used to seeing freakishly beautiful faces on everyone.

But Art3mis's features didn't look as though they'd been selected from a beauty drop-down menu on some avatar creation template.

Her face had the distinctive look of a real person's, as if her true features had been scanned in and mapped onto her avatar.

Big hazel eyes, rounded cheekbones, a pointy chin, and a perpetual smirk.

I found her unbearably attractive.

Art3mis's body was also somewhat unusual.

In the OASIS, you usually saw one of two body shapes on female avatars: the absurdly thin yet wildly popular supermodel frame, or the top-heavy, wasp-waisted porn starlet physique (which looked even less natural in the OASIS than it did in the real world).

But Art3mis's frame was short and Rubenesque.

All curves.

I knew the crush I had on Art3mis was both silly and ill-advised.

What did I really know about her?

She'd never revealed her true identity, of course.

Or her age or location in the real world.

There was no telling what she really looked like.

She could be fifteen or fifty.

A lot of gunters even questioned whether she was really female, but I wasn't one of them.

Probably because I couldn't bear the idea that the girl with whom I was virtually smitten might actually be some middle-aged dude named Chuck, with back hair and male-pattern baldness.

In the years since I'd first started reading Arty's Missives, it had become one of the most popular blogs on the Internet, now logging several million hits a day.

And Art3mis was now something of a celebrity, at least in gunter circles.

But fame hadn't gone to her head.

Her writing was still as funny and self-deprecating as ever.

Her newest blog post was titled "The John Hughes Blues,"

and it was an in-depth treatise on her six favorite John Hughes teen movies, which she divided into two separate trilogies: The "Dorky Girl Fantasies"

trilogy (Sixteen Candles, Pretty in Pink, and Some Kind of Wonderful) and the "Dorky Boy Fantasies"

trilogy (The Breakfast Club, Weird Science, and Ferris Bueller's Day Off).

Just as I'd finished reading it, an instant message window popped up on my display.

It was my best friend, Aech.

(OK, if you want to split hairs, he was my only friend, not counting Mrs.

Gilmore.) Aech: Top o' the morning, amigo.

Parzival: Hola, compadre.

Aech: What are you up to?

Parzival: Just surfing the turf.

You?

Aech: Got the Basement online.

Come and hang out before school, fool.

Parzival: Sweet!

I'll be there in a sec.

I closed the IM window and checked the time.

I still had about half an hour until class started.

I grinned and tapped a small door icon at the edge of my display, then selected Aech's chat room from my list of favorites.

The system verified that I was on the chat room's access list and allowed me to enter.

My view of the classroom shrank from the limits of my peripheral vision to a small thumbnail window in the lower right of my display, allowing me to monitor what was in front of my avatar.

The rest of my field of vision was now filled with the interior of Aech's chat room.

My avatar appeared just inside the "entrance,"

a door at the top of a carpeted staircase.

The door didn't lead anywhere.

It didn't even open.

This was because the Basement and its contents didn't exist as a part of the OASIS.

Chat rooms were stand-alone simulations- temporary virtual spaces that avatars could access from anywhere in OASIS.

My avatar wasn't actually "in"

the chat room.

It only appeared that way.

Wade3/Parzival was still sitting in my World History classroom with his eyes closed.

Logging into a chat room was a little like being in two places at once.

Aech had named his chat room the Basement.

He'd programmed it to look like a large suburban rec room, circa the late 1980s.

Old movie and comic book posters covered the wood-paneled walls.

A vintage RCA television stood in the center of the room, hooked up to a Betamax VCR, a LaserDisc player, and several vintage videogame consoles.

Bookshelves lined the far wall, filled with role-playing game supplements and back issues of Dragon magazine.

Hosting a chat room this large wasn't cheap, but Aech could afford it.

He made quite a bit of dough competing in televised PvP arena games after school and on the weekends.

Aech was one of the highest-ranked combatants in the OASIS, in both the Deathmatch and Capture the Flag leagues.

He was even more famous than Art3mis.

Over the past few years, the Basement had become a highly exclusive hangout for elite gunters.

Aech granted access only to people he deemed worthy, so being invited to hang out in the Basement was a big honor, especially for a third-level nobody like me.

As I descended the staircase, I saw a few dozen other gunters milling around, with avatars that varied wildly in appearance.

There were humans, cyborgs, demons, dark elves, Vulcans, and vampires.

Most of them were gathered around the row of old arcade games against the wall.

A few others stood by the ancient stereo (currently blasting "The Wild Boys"

by Duran Duran), browsing through Aech's giant rack of vintage cassette tapes.

Aech himself was sprawled on one of the chat room's three couches, which were arrayed in a U-shape in front of the TV.

Aech's avatar was a tall, broad- shouldered Caucasian male with dark hair and brown eyes.

I'd asked him once if he looked anything like his avatar in real life, and he'd jokingly replied, "Yes.

But in real life, I'm even more handsome."

As I walked over, he glanced up from the Intellivision game he was playing.

His distinctive Cheshire grin stretched from ear to ear.

"Z!"

he shouted.

"What is up, amigo?"

He stretched out his right hand and gave me five as I dropped onto the couch opposite him.

Aech had started calling me "Z"

shortly after I met him.

He liked to give people single-letter nicknames.

Aech pronounced his own avatar's name just like the letter "H."

"What up, Humperdinck?"

I said.

This was a game we played.

I always called him by some random H name, like Harry, Hubert, Henry, or Hogan.

I was making guesses at his real first name, which, he'd once confided to me, began with the letter "H."

I'd known Aech for a little over three years.

He was also a student on Ludus, a senior at OPS #1172, which was on the opposite side of the planet from my school.

We'd met one weekend in a public gunter chat room and hit it off immediately, because we shared all of the same interests.

Which is to say one interest: a total, all-consuming obsession with Halliday and his Easter egg.

A few minutes into our first conversation, I knew Aech was the real deal, an elite gunter with some serious mental kung fu.

He had his '80s trivia down cold, and not just the canon stuff, either.

He was a true Halliday scholar.

And he'd apparently seen the same qualities in me, because he'd given me his contact card and invited me to hang out in the Basement whenever I liked.

He'd been my closest friend ever since.

Over the years, a friendly rivalry had gradually developed between us.

We did a lot of trash-talking about which one of us would get his name up on the Scoreboard first.

We were constantly trying to out-geek each other with our knowledge of obscure gunter trivia.

Sometimes we even conducted our research together.

This usually consisted of watching cheesy '80s movies and TV shows here in his chat room.

We also played a lot of videogames, of course.

Aech and I had wasted countless hours on two-player classics like Contra, Golden Axe, Heavy Barrel, Smash TV, and Ikari Warriors.

Aside from yours truly, Aech was the best all-around gamer I'd ever encountered.

We were evenly matched at most games, but he could trounce me at certain titles, especially anything in the first- person shooter genre.

That was his area of expertise, after all.

I didn't know anything about who Aech was in the real world, but I got the sense his home life wasn't that great.

Like me, he seemed to spend every waking moment logged into the OASIS.

And even though we'd never actually met in person, he'd told me more than once that I was his best friend, so I assumed he was just as isolated and lonely as I was.

"So what did you do after you bailed last night?"

he asked, tossing me the other Intellivision controller.

We'd hung out here in his chat room for a few hours the previous evening, watching old Japanese monster movies.

"Nada,"

I said.

"Went home and brushed up on a few classic coin-ops."

"Unnecessary."

"Yeah.

But I was in the mood."

I didn't ask him what he'd done the night before, and he didn't volunteer any details.

I knew he'd probably gone to Gygax, or somewhere equally awesome, to speedrun through a few quests and rack up some XPs.

He just didn't want to rub it in.

Aech could afford to spend a fair amount of time off-world, following up leads and searching for the Copper Key.

But he never lorded this over me, or ridiculed me for not having enough dough to teleport anywhere.

And he never insulted me by offering to loan me a few credits.

It was an unspoken rule among gunters: If you were a solo, you didn't want or need help, from anyone.

Gunters who wanted help joined a clan, and Aech and I both agreed that clans were for suck-asses and poseurs.

We'd both vowed to remain solos for life.

We still occasionally had discussions about the egg, but these conversations were always guarded, and we were careful to avoid talking about specifics.

After I beat Aech at three rounds of Tron: Deadly Discs, he threw down his Intellivision controller in disgust and grabbed a magazine off the floor.

It was an old issue of Starlog.

I recognized Rutger Hauer on the cover, in a Ladyhawke promotional photo.

"Starlog, eh?"

I said, nodding my approval.

"Yep.

Downloaded every single issue from the Hatchery's archive.

Still working my way through 'em.

I was just reading this great piece on Ewoks: The Battle for Endor."

"Made for TV.

Released in 1985,"

I recited.

Star Wars trivia was one of my specialties.

"Total garbage.

A real low point in the history of the Wars."

"Says you, assface.

It has some great moments."

"No,"

I said, shaking my head.

"It doesn't.

It's even worse than that first Ewok flick, Caravan of Courage.

They shoulda called it Caravan of Suck."

Aech rolled his eyes and went back to reading.

He wasn't going to take the bait.

I eyed the magazine's cover.

"Hey, can I have a look at that when you're done?"

He grinned.

"Why?

So you can read the article on Ladyhawke?"

"Maybe."

"Man, you just love that crapburger, don't you?"

"Blow me, Aech."

"How many times have you seen that sapfest?

I know you've made me sit through it at least twice."

He was baiting me now.

He knew Ladyhawke was one of my guilty pleasures, and that I'd seen it over two dozen times.

"I was doing you a favor by making you watch it, noob,"

I said.

I shoved a new cartridge into the Intellivision console and started up a single-player game of Astrosmash.

"You'll thank me one day.

Wait and see.

Ladyhawke is canon."

"Canon"

was the term we used to classify any movie, book, game, song, or TV show of which Halliday was known to have been a fan.

"Surely, you must be joking,"

Aech said.

"No, I am not joking.

And don't call me Shirley."

He lowered the magazine and leaned forward.

"There is no way Halliday was a fan of Ladyhawke.

I guarantee it."

"Where's your proof, dipshit?"

I asked.

"The man had taste.

That's all the proof I need."

"Then please explain to me why he owned Ladyhawke on both VHS and LaserDisc?"

A list of all the films in Halliday's collection at the time of his death was included in the appendices of Anorak's Almanac.

We both had the list memorized.

"The guy was a billionaire!

He owned millions of movies, most of which he probably never even watched!

He had DVDs of Howard the Duck and Krull, too.

That doesn't mean he liked them, asshat.

And it sure as hell doesn't make them canon."

"It's not really up for debate, Homer,"

I said.

"Ladyhawke is an eighties classic."

"It's fucking lame, is what it is!

The swords look like they were made out of tinfoil.

And that soundtrack is epically lame.

Full of synthesizers and shit.

By the motherfucking Alan Parsons Project!

Lame-o-rama!

Beyond lame.

Highlander II lame."

"Hey!"

I feigned hurling my Intellivision controller at him.

"Now you're just being insulting!

Ladyhawke's cast alone makes the film canon!

Roy Batty!

Ferris Bueller!

And the dude who played Professor Falken in WarGames!"

I searched my memory for the actor's name.

"John Wood!

Reunited with Matthew Broderick!"

"A real low point in both of their careers,"

he said, laughing.

He loved arguing about old movies, even more than I did.

The other gunters in the chat room were now starting to form a small crowd around us to listen in.

Our arguments were often high in entertainment value.

"You must be stoned!"

I shouted.

"Ladyhawke was directed by Richard fucking Donner!

The Goonies?

Superman: The Movie?

You're saying that guy sucks?"

"I don't care if Spielberg directed it.

It's a chick flick disguised as a sword- and-sorcery picture.

The only genre film with less balls is probably ...

freakin' Legend.

Anyone who actually enjoys Ladyhawke is a bona fide USDA-choice pussy!"

Laughter from the peanut gallery.

I was actually getting a little pissed off now.

I was a big fan of Legend too, and Aech knew it.

"Oh, so I'm a pussy?

You're the one with the Ewok fetish!"

I snatched the Starlog out of his hands and threw it against a Revenge of the Jedi poster on the wall.

"I suppose you think your extensive knowledge of Ewok culture is gonna help you find the egg?"

"Don't start on the Endorians again, man,"

he said, holding up an index finger.

"I've warned you.

I will ban your ass.

I swear."

I knew this was a hollow threat, so I was about to push the Ewok thing even further, maybe give him some crap for referring to them as "Endorians."

But just then, a new arrival materialized on the staircase.

A total lamer by the name of I-r0k.

I let out a groan.

I-r0k and Aech attended the same school and had a few classes together, but I still couldn't figure out why Aech had granted him access to the Basement.

I-r0k fancied himself an elite gunter, but he was nothing but an obnoxious poseur.

Sure, he did a lot of teleporting around the OASIS, completing quests and leveling up his avatar, but he didn't actually know anything.

And he was always brandishing an oversize plasma rifle the size of a snowmobile.

Even in chat rooms, where it was totally pointless.

The guy had no sense of decorum.

"Are you cocks arguing about Star Wars again?"

he said, descending the steps and walking over to join the crowd around us.

"That shit is so played out, yo."

I turned to Aech.

"If you want to ban someone, why don't you start with this clown?"

I hit Reset on the Intellivision and started another game.

"Shut your hole, Penis-ville!"

I-r0k replied, using his favorite mispronunciation of my avatar's name.

"He doesn't ban me 'cause he knows I'm elite!

Ain't that right, Aech?"

"No,"

Aech said, rolling his eyes.

"That ain't right.

You're about as elite as my great-grandmother.

And she's dead."

"Screw you, Aech!

And your dead grandma!"

"Gee, I-r0k,"

I muttered.

"You always manage to elevate the intelligence level of the conversation.

The whole room just lights up the moment you arrive."

"So sorry to upset you, Captain No-Credits,"

I-r0k said.

"Hey, shouldn't you be on Incipio panhandling for change right now?"

He reached for the second Intellivision controller, but I snatched it up and tossed it to Aech.

He scowled at me.

"Prick."

"Poseur."

"Poseur?

Penis-ville is calling me a poseur?"

He turned to address the small crowd.

"This chump is so broke that he has to bum rides to Greyhawk, just so he can kill kobolds for copper pieces!

And he's calling me a poseur!"

This elicited a few snickers from the crowd, and I felt my face turn red under my visor.

Once, about a year ago, I'd made the mistake of hitching a ride off- world with I-r0k to try to gain a few experience points.

After dropping me in a low-level quest area on Greyhawk, the jerk had followed me.

I'd spent the next few hours slaying a small band of kobolds, waiting for them to respawn, and then slaying them again, over and over.

My avatar was still only first level at the time, and it was one of the only safe ways for me to level up.

I-r0k had taken several screenshots of my avatar that night and labeled them "Penis-ville the Mighty Kobold Slayer."

Then he'd posted them to the Hatchery.

He still brought it up every chance he got.

He was never going to let me live it down.

"That's right, I called you a poseur, poseur."

I stood and got up in his grille.

"You're an ignorant know-nothing twink.

Just because you're fourteenth-level, it doesn't make you a gunter.

You actually have to possess some knowledge."

"Word,"

Aech said, nodding his agreement.

We bumped fists.

More snickering from the crowd, now directed at I-r0k.

I-r0k glared at us a moment.

"OK.

Let's see who the real poseur is,"

he said.

"Check this out, girls."

Grinning, he produced an item from his inventory and held it up.

It was an old Atari 2600 game, still in the box.

He purposefully covered the game's title with his hand, but I recognized the cover artwork anyway.

It was a painting of a young man and woman in ancient Greek attire, both brandishing swords.

Lurking behind them were a minotaur and a bearded guy with an eye patch.

"Know what this is, hotshot?"

I-r0k said, challenging me.

"I'll even give you a clue....

It's an Atari game, released as part of a contest.

It contained several puzzles, and if you solved them, you could win a prize.

Sound familiar?"

I-r0k was always trying to impress us with some clue or piece of Halliday lore he foolishly believed he'd been the first to uncover.

Gunters loved to play the game of one-upmanship and were constantly trying to prove they had acquired more obscure knowledge than everyone else.

But I-r0k totally sucked at it.

"You're joking, right?"

I said.

"You just now discovered the Swordquest series?"

I-r0k deflated.

"You're holding Swordquest: Earthworld,"

I continued.

"The first game in the Swordquest series.

Released in 1982."

I smiled wide.

"Can you name the next three games in the series?"

His eyes narrowed.

He was, of course, stumped.

Like I said, he was a total poseur.

"Anyone else?"

I said, opening the question up to the floor.

The gunters in the crowd eyed each other, but no one spoke up.

"Fireworld, Waterworld, and Airworld,"

Aech answered.

"Bingo!"

I said, and we bumped fists again.

"Although Airworld was never actually finished, because Atari fell on hard times and canceled the contest before it was completed."

I-r0k quietly put the game box back in his inventory.

"You should join up with the Sux0rz, I-r0k,"

Aech said, laughing.

"They could really use someone with your vast stores of knowledge."

I-r0k flipped him the bird.

"If you two fags already knew about the Swordquest contest, how come I've never once heard you mention it?"

"Come on, I-r0k,"

Aech said, shaking his head.

"Swordquest: Earthworld was Atari's unofficial sequel to Adventure.

Every gunter worth their salt knows about that contest.

How much more obvious can you get?"

I-r0k tried to save some face.

"OK, if you're both such experts, who programmed all of the Swordquest games?"

"Dan Hitchens and Tod Frye,"

I recited.

"Try asking me something difficult."

"I got one for you,"

Aech interjected.

"What were the prizes Atari gave out to the winner of each contest?"

"Ah,"

I said.

"Good one.

Let's see....

The prize for the Earthworld contest was the Talisman of Penultimate Truth.

It was solid gold and encrusted with diamonds.

The kid who won it melted it down to pay for college, as I recall."

"Yeah, yeah,"

Aech prodded.

"Quit stalling.

What about the other two?"

"I'm not stalling.

The Fireworld prize was the Chalice of Light, and the Waterworld prize was supposed to be the Crown of Life, but it was never awarded, due to the cancellation of the contest.

Same goes for the Airworld prize, which was supposed to be a Philosopher's Stone."

Aech grinned and gave me a double high five, then added, "And if the contest hadn't been canceled, the winners of the first four rounds would have competed for the grand prize, the Sword of Ultimate Sorcery."

I nodded.

"The prizes were all mentioned in the Swordquest comic books that came with the games.

Comic books which happen to be visible in the treasure room in the final scene of Anorak's Invitation, by the way."

The crowd burst into applause.

I-r0k lowered his head in shame.

Since I'd become a gunter, it had been obvious to me that Halliday had drawn inspiration for his contest from the Swordquest contest.

I had no idea if he'd borrowed any of the puzzles from them too, but I'd studied the games and their solutions thoroughly, just to be safe.

"Fine.

You win,"

I-r0k said.

"But you both obviously need to get a life."

"And you,"

I said, "obviously need to find a new hobby.

Because you clearly lack the intelligence and commitment to be a gunter."

"No doubt,"

Aech said.

"Try doing some research for a change, I-r0k.

I mean, did you ever hear of Wikipedia?

It's free, douchebag."

I-r0k turned and walked over to the long boxes of comic books stacked on the other side of the room, as if he'd lost interest in the discussion.

"Whatever,"

he said over his shoulder.

"If I didn't spend so much time offline, getting laid, I'd probably know just as much worthless shit as you two do."

Aech ignored him and turned back to me.

"What were the names of the twins who appeared in the Swordquest comic books?"

"Tarra and Torr."

"Damn, Z!

You are the man."

"Thanks, Aech."

A message flashed on my display, informing me that the three-minute-warning bell had just rung in my classroom.

I knew Aech and I-r0k were seeing the same warning, because our schools operated on the same schedule.

"Time for another day of higher learning,"

Aech said, standing up.

"Drag,"

I-r0k said.

"See you losers later."

He gave me the finger; then his avatar disappeared as he logged out of the chat room.

The other gunters began to log out and vanish too, until only Aech and I remained.

"Seriously, Aech,"

I said.

"Why do you let that moron hang out here?"

"Because he's fun to beat at videogames.

And his ignorance gives me hope."

"How so?"

"Because if most of the other gunters out there are as clueless as I-r0k-and they are, Z, believe me-that means you and I really do have a shot at winning the contest."

I shrugged.

"I guess that's one way to look at it."

"Wanna hang after school again tonight?

Around seven or so?

I've got a few errands to run, but then I'm gonna tackle some of the stuff on my need-to-watch list.

A Spaced marathon, perhaps?"

"Oh, hell yes,"

I said.

"Count me in."

We logged out simultaneously, just as the final bell began to ring.

My avatar's eyes slid open, and I was back in my World History classroom.

The seats around me were now filled with other students, and our teacher, Mr.

Avenovich, was materializing at the front of the classroom.

Mr.

A's avatar looked like a portly, bearded college professor.

He sported an infectious grin, wire- rimmed spectacles, and a tweed jacket with patches on the elbows.

When he spoke, he somehow always managed to sound like he was reading a passage from Dickens.

I liked him.

He was a good teacher.

Of course, we didn't know who Mr.

Avenovich really was or where he lived.

We didn't know his real name, or even if "he"

was really a man.

For all we knew, he could have been a small Inuit woman living in Anchorage, Alaska, who had adopted this appearance and voice to make her students more receptive to her lessons.

But for some reason, I suspected that Mr.

Avenovich's avatar looked and sounded just like the person operating it.

All of my teachers were pretty great.

Unlike their real-world counterparts, most of the OASIS public school teachers seemed to genuinely enjoy their job, probably because they didn't have to spend half their time acting as babysitters and disciplinarians.

The OASIS software took care of that, ensuring that students remained quiet and in their seats.

All the teachers had to do was teach.

It was also a lot easier for online teachers to hold their students' attention, because here in the OASIS, the classrooms were like holodecks.

Teachers could take their students on a virtual field trip every day, without ever leaving the school grounds.

During our World History lesson that morning, Mr.

Avenovich loaded up a stand-alone simulation so that our class could witness the discovery of King Tut's tomb by archaeologists in Egypt in AD 1922.

(The day before, we'd visited the same spot in 1334 BC and had seen Tutankhamen's empire in all its glory.) In my next class, Biology, we traveled through a human heart and watched it pumping from the inside, just like in that old movie Fantastic Voyage.

In Art class we toured the Louvre while all of our avatars wore silly berets.

In my Astronomy class we visited each of Jupiter's moons.

We stood on the volcanic surface of Io while our teacher explained how the moon had originally formed.

As our teacher spoke to us, Jupiter loomed behind her, filling half the sky, its Great Red Spot churning slowly just over her left shoulder.

Then she snapped her fingers and we were standing on Europa, discussing the possibility of extraterrestrial life beneath the moon's icy crust.

I spent my lunch period sitting in one of the green fields bordering the school, staring at the simulated scenery while I munched on a protein bar with my visor on.

It beat staring at the inside of my hideout.

I was a senior, so I was allowed to go off-world during lunch if I wanted to, but I didn't have that kind of spare dough to blow.

Logging into the OASIS was free, but traveling around inside it wasn't.

Most of the time, I didn't have enough credits to teleport off-world and get back to Ludus.

When the last bell rang each day, the students who had things to do in the real world would log out of the OASIS and vanish.

Everyone else would head off-world.

A lot of kids owned their own interplanetary vehicles.

School parking lots all over Ludus were filled with UFOs, TIE fighters, old NASA space shuttles, Vipers from Battlestar Galactica, and other spacecraft designs lifted from every sci-fi movie and TV show you can think of.

Every afternoon I would stand on the school's front lawn and watch with envy as these ships filled the sky, zooming off to explore the simulation's endless possibilities.

The kids who didn't own ships would either hitch a ride with a friend or stampede to the nearest transport terminal, headed for some offworld dance club, gaming arena, or rock concert.

But not me.

I wasn't going anywhere.

I was stranded on Ludus, the most boring planet in the entire OASIS.

The Ontologically Anthropocentric Sensory Immersive Simulation was a big place.

When the OASIS had first been launched, it contained only a few hundred planets for users to explore, all created by GSS programmers and artists.

Their environments ran the gamut, from sword-and-sorcery settings to cyberpunk- themed planetwide cities to irradiated postapocalyptic zombie-infested wastelands.

Some planets were designed with painstaking detail.

Others were randomly generated from a series of templates.

Each one was populated with a variety of artificially intelligent NPCs (nonplayer characters)-computer- controlled humans, animals, monsters, aliens, and androids with which OASIS users could interact.

GSS had also licensed preexisting virtual worlds from their competitors, so content that had already been created for games like Everquest and World of Warcraft was ported over to the OASIS, and copies of Norrath and Azeroth were added to the growing catalog of OASIS planets.

Other virtual worlds soon followed suit, from the Metaverse to the Matrix.

The Firefly universe was anchored in a sector adjacent to the Star Wars galaxy, with a detailed re-creation of the Star Trek universe in the sector adjacent to that.

Users could now teleport back and forth between their favorite fictional worlds.

Middle Earth.

Vulcan.

Pern.

Arrakis.

Magrathea.

Discworld, Mid-World, Riverworld, Ringworld.

Worlds upon worlds.

For the sake of zoning and navigation, the OASIS had been divided equally into twenty-seven cube-shaped "sectors,"

each containing hundreds of different planets.

(The three-dimensional map of all twenty-seven sectors distinctly resembled an '80s puzzle toy called a Rubik's Cube.

Like most gunters, I knew this was no coincidence.) Each sector measured exactly ten light-hours across, or about 10.8 billion kilometers.

So if you were traveling at the speed of light (the fastest speed attainable by any spacecraft inside the OASIS), you could get from one side of a sector to the other in exactly ten hours.

That sort of long-distance travel wasn't cheap.

Spacecraft that could travel at light speed were rare, and they required fuel to operate.

Charging people for virtual fuel to power their virtual spaceships was one of the ways Gregarious Simulation Systems generated revenue, since accessing the OASIS was free.

But GSS's primary source of income came from teleportation fares.

Teleportation was the fastest way to travel, but it was also the most expensive.

Traveling around inside the OASIS wasn't just costly-it was also dangerous.

Each sector was divided up into many different zones that varied in size and shape.

Some zones were so large that they encompassed several planets, while others covered only a few kilometers on the surface of a single world.

Each zone had a unique combination of rules and parameters.

Magic would function in some zones and not in others.

The same was true of technology.

If you flew your technology-based starship into a zone where technology didn't function, your engines would fail the moment you crossed the zone border.

Then you'd have to hire some silly gray-bearded sorcerer with a spell-powered space barge to tow your ass back into a technology zone.

Dual zones permitted the use of both magic and technology, and null zones didn't allow either.

There were pacifist zones where no player-versus-player combat was allowed, and player-versus-player zones where it was every avatar for themselves.

You had to be careful whenever you entered a new zone or sector.

You had to be prepared.

But like I said, I didn't have that problem.

I was stuck at school.

Ludus had been designed as a place of learning, so the planet had been created without a single quest portal or gaming zone anywhere on its surface.

The only thing to be found here were thousands of identical school campuses separated by rolling green fields, perfectly landscaped parks, rivers, meadows, and sprawling template-generated forests.

There were no castles, dungeons, or orbiting space fortresses for my avatar to raid.

And there were no NPC villains, monsters, or aliens for me to fight, so there was no treasure or magic items for me to plunder.

This totally sucked, for a lot of reasons.

Completing quests, fighting NPCs, and gathering treasure were the only ways a low-level avatar like mine could earn experience points (XPs).

Earning XPs was how you increased your avatar's power level, strength, and abilities.

A lot of OASIS users didn't care about their avatar's power level or bother with the gaming aspects of the simulation at all.

They only used the OASIS for entertainment, business, shopping, and hanging out with their friends.

These users simply avoided entering any gaming or PvP zones where their defenseless first-level avatars could be attacked by NPCs or by other players.

If you stayed in safe zones, like Ludus, you didn't have to worry about your avatar getting robbed, kidnapped, or killed.

I hated being stuck in a safe zone.

If I was going to find Halliday's egg, I knew I would eventually have to venture out in the dangerous sectors of the OASIS.

And if I wasn't powerful or well-armed enough to defend myself, I wasn't going to stay alive for very long.

Over the past five years, I'd managed to slowly, gradually raise my avatar up to third level.

This hadn't been easy.

I'd done it by hitching rides off-world with other students (mostly Aech) who happened to be headed to a planet where my wuss avatar could survive.

I'd have them drop me near a newbie-level gaming zone and spend the rest of the night or weekend slaying orcs, kobolds, or some other piddly class of monster that was too weak to kill me.

For each NPC my avatar defeated, I would earn a few meager experience points and, usually, a handful of copper or silver coins dropped by my slain foes.

These coins were instantly converted to credits, which I used to pay the teleportation fare back to Ludus, often just before the final school bell rang.

Sometimes, but not often, one of the NPCs I killed would drop an item.

That was how I'd obtained my avatar's sword, shield, and armor.

I'd stopped hitching rides with Aech at the end of the previous school year.

His avatar was now above thirtieth level, and so he was almost always headed to a planet where it wasn't safe for my avatar.

He was happy to drop me on some noob world along the way, but if I didn't earn enough credits to pay for my fare back to Ludus, I'd wind up missing school because I was stuck on some other planet.

This was not an acceptable excuse.

I'd now racked up so many unexcused absences that I was in danger of being expelled.

If that happened, I would have to return my school-issued OASIS console and visor.

Worse, I'd be transferred back to school in the real world to finish out my senior year there.

I couldn't risk that.

So these days I rarely left Ludus at all.

I was stuck here, and stuck at third level.

Having a third-level avatar was a colossal embarrassment.

None of the other gunters took you seriously unless you were at least tenth level.

Even though I'd been a gunter since day one, everyone still considered me a noob.

It was beyond frustrating.

In desperation, I'd tried to find a part-time after-school job, just to earn some walking-around money.

I applied for dozens of tech support and programming jobs (mostly grunt construction work, coding parts of OASIS malls and office buildings), but it was completely hopeless.

Millions of college-educated adults couldn't get one of those jobs.

The Great Recession was now entering its third decade, and unemployment was still at a record high.

Even the fast-food joints in my neighborhood had a two-year waiting list for job applicants.

So I remained stuck at school.

I felt like a kid standing in the world's greatest video arcade without any quarters, unable to do anything but walk around and watch the other kids play.

After lunch, I headed to my favorite class, Advanced OASIS Studies.

This was a senior-year elective where you learned about the history of the OASIS and its creators.

Talk about an easy A.

For the past five years, I'd devoted all of my free time to learning as much as I possibly could about James Halliday.

I'd exhaustively studied his life, accomplishments, and interests.

Over a dozen different Halliday biographies had been published in the years since his death, and I'd read them all.

Several documentary films had also been made about him, and I'd studied those, too.

I'd studied every word Halliday had ever written, and I'd played every videogame he'd ever made.

I took notes, writing down every detail I thought might be related to the Hunt.

I kept everything in a notebook (which I'd started to call my "grail diary"

after watching the third Indiana Jones film).

The more I'd learned about Halliday's life, the more I'd grown to idolize him.

He was a god among geeks, a nerd ber-deity on the level of Gygax, Garriott, and Gates.

He'd left home after high school with nothing but his wits and his imagination, and he'd used them to attain worldwide fame and amass a vast fortune.

He'd created an entirely new reality that now provided an escape for most of humanity.

And to top it all off, he'd turned his last will and testament into the greatest videogame contest of all time.

I spent most of my time in Advanced OASIS Studies class annoying our teacher, Mr.

Ciders, by pointing out errors in our textbook and raising my hand to interject some relevant bit of Halliday trivia that I (and I alone) thought was interesting.

After the first few weeks of class, Mr.

Ciders had stopped calling on me unless no one else knew the answer to his question.

Today, he was reading excerpts from The Egg Man, a bestselling Halliday biography that I'd already read four times.

During his lecture, I kept having to resist the urge to interrupt him and point out all of the really important details the book left out.

Instead, I just made a mental note of each omission, and as Mr.

Ciders began to recount the circumstances of Halliday's childhood, I once again tried to glean whatever secrets I could from the strange way Halliday had lived his life, and from the odd clues about himself he'd chosen to leave behind.

James Donovan Halliday was born on June 12, 1972, in Middletown, Ohio.

He was an only child.

His father was an alcoholic machine operator and his mother was a bipolar waitress.

By all accounts, James was a bright boy, but socially inept.

He had an extremely difficult time communicating with the people around him.

Despite his obvious intelligence, he did poorly in school, because most of his attention was focused on computers, comic books, sci-fi and fantasy novels, movies, and above all else, videogames.

One day in junior high, Halliday was sitting alone in the cafeteria reading a Dungeons & Dragons Player's Handbook.

The game fascinated him, but he'd never actually played it, because he'd never had any friends to play it with.

A boy in his class named Ogden Morrow noticed what Halliday was reading and invited him to attend one of the weekly D&D gaming sessions held at his house.

There, in Morrow's basement, Halliday was introduced to an entire group of "mega geeks"

just like himself.

They immediately accepted him as one of their own, and for the first time in his life, James Halliday had a circle of friends.

Ogden Morrow eventually became Halliday's business partner, collaborator, and best friend.

Many would later liken the pairing of Morrow and Halliday to that of Jobs and Wozniak or Lennon and McCartney.

It was a partnership destined to alter the course of human history.

At age fifteen, Halliday created his first videogame, Anorak's Quest.

He programmed it in BASIC on a TRS-80 Color Computer he'd received the previous Christmas (though he'd asked his parents for the slightly more expensive Commodore 64).

Anorak's Quest was an adventure game set in Chthonia, the fantasy world Halliday had created for his high-school Dungeons & Dragons campaign.

"Anorak"

was a nickname Halliday had been given by a female British exchange student at his high school.

He liked the name Anorak so much that he'd used it for his favorite D&D character, the powerful wizard who later appeared in many of his videogames.

Halliday created Anorak's Quest for fun, to share with the guys in his D&D gaming group.

They all found the game addictive, and lost countless hours attempting to solve its intricate riddles and puzzles.

Ogden Morrow convinced Halliday that Anorak's Quest was better than most of the computer games currently on the market, and encouraged him to try selling it.

He helped Halliday create some simple cover artwork for the game, and together, the two of them hand-copied Anorak's Quest onto dozens of 514-inch floppy disks and stuck them into Ziploc bags along with a single photocopied sheet of instructions.

They began selling the game on the software rack at their local computer store.

Before long, they couldn't make copies fast enough to meet the demand.

Morrow and Halliday decided to start their own videogame company, Gregarious Games, which initially operated out of Morrow's basement.

Halliday programmed new versions of Anorak's Quest for the Atari 800XL, Apple II, and Commodore 64 computers, and Morrow began placing ads for the game in the back of several computer magazines.

Within six months, Anorak's Quest became a national bestseller.

Halliday and Morrow almost didn't graduate from high school because they spent most of their senior year working on Anorak's Quest II.

And instead of going off to college, they both focused all of their energy on their new company, which had now grown too large for Morrow's basement.

In 1990, Gregarious Games moved into its first real office, located in a run-down strip mall in Columbus, Ohio.

Over the next decade, the small company took the videogame industry by storm, releasing a series of bestselling action and adventure games, all using a groundbreaking first-person graphics engine created by Halliday.

Gregarious Games set a new standard for immersive gaming, and every time they released a new title, it pushed the envelope of what seemed possible on the computer hardware available at the time.

The rotund Ogden Morrow was naturally charismatic, and he handled all of the company's business affairs and public relations.

At every Gregarious Games press conference, Morrow grinned infectiously from behind his unruly beard and wire-rimmed spectacles, using his natural gift for hype and hyperbole.

Halliday seemed to be Morrow's polar opposite in every way.

He was tall, gaunt, and painfully shy, and he preferred to stay out of the limelight.

People employed by Gregarious Games during this period say that Halliday frequently locked himself in his office, where he programmed incessantly, often going without food, sleep, or human contact for days or even weeks.

On the few occasions that Halliday agreed to do interviews, his behavior came off as bizarre, even by game-designer standards.

He was hyperkinetic, aloof, and so socially inept that the interviewers often came away with the impression he was mentally ill.

Halliday tended to speak so rapidly that his words were often unintelligible, and he had a disturbing high-pitched laugh, made even more so because he was usually the only one who knew what he was laughing about.

When Halliday got bored during an interview (or conversation), he would usually get up and walk out without saying a word.

Halliday had many well-known obsessions.

Chief among them were classic videogames, sci-fi and fantasy novels, and movies of all genres.

He also had an extreme fixation on the 1980s, the decade during which he'd been a teenager.

Halliday seemed to expect everyone around him to share his obsessions, and he often lashed out at those who didn't.

He was known to fire longtime employees for not recognizing an obscure line of movie dialogue he quoted, or if he discovered they weren't familiar with one of his favorite cartoons, comic books, or videogames.

(Ogden Morrow would always hire the employee back, usually without Halliday ever noticing.) As the years went on, Halliday's already-stunted social skills seemed to deteriorate even further.

(Several exhaustive psychological studies were done on Halliday following his death, and his obsessive adherence to routine and preoccupation with a few obscure areas of interest led many psychologists to conclude that Halliday had suffered from Asperger's syndrome, or from some other form of high-functioning autism.) Despite his eccentricities, no one ever questioned Halliday's genius.

The games he created were addictive and wildly popular.

By the end of the twentieth century, Halliday was widely recognized as the greatest videogame designer of his generation-and, some would argue, of all time.

Ogden Morrow was a brilliant programmer in his own right, but his true talent was his knack for business.

In addition to collaborating on the company's games, he masterminded all of their early marketing campaigns and shareware distribution schemes, with astounding results.

When Gregarious Games finally went public, their stock immediately shot into the stratosphere.

By their thirtieth birthdays, Halliday and Morrow were both multimillionaires.

They purchased mansions on the same street.

Morrow bought a Lamborghini, took several long vacations, and traveled the world.

Halliday bought and restored one of the original DeLoreans used in the Back to the Future films, continued to spend nearly all of his time welded to a computer keyboard, and used his newfound wealth to amass what would eventually become the world's largest private collection of classic videogames, Star Wars action figures, vintage lunch boxes, and comic books.

At the height of its success, Gregarious Games appeared to fall dormant.

Several years elapsed during which they released no new games.

Morrow made cryptic announcements, saying the company was working on an ambitious project that would move them in an entirely new direction.

Rumors began to circulate that Gregarious Games was developing some sort of new computer gaming hardware and that this secret project was rapidly exhausting the company's considerable financial resources.

There were also indications that both Halliday and Morrow had invested most of their own personal fortunes in the company's new endeavor.

Word began to spread that Gregarious Games was in danger of going bankrupt.

Then, in December 2012, Gregarious Games rebranded itself as Gregarious Simulation Systems, and under this new banner they launched their flagship product, the only product GSS would ever release: the OASIS-the Ontologically Anthropocentric Sensory Immersive Simulation.

The OASIS would ultimately change the way people around the world lived, worked, and communicated.

It would transform entertainment, social networking, and even global politics.

Even though it was initially marketed as a new kind of massively multiplayer online game, the OASIS quickly evolved into a new way of life.

In the days before the OASIS, massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) were among the first shared synthetic environments.

They allowed thousands of players to simultaneously coexist inside a simulated world, which they connected to via the Internet.

The overall size of these environments was relatively small, usually just a single world, or a dozen or so small planets.

MMO players could only see these online environments through a small two- dimensional window-their desktop computer monitor-and they could only interact with it by using keyboards, mice, and other crude input devices.

Gregarious Simulation Systems elevated the MMO concept to an entirely new level.

The OASIS didn't limit its users to just one planet, or even a dozen.

The OASIS contained hundreds (and eventually thousands) of high-resolution 3-D worlds for people to explore, and each one was beautifully rendered in meticulous graphical detail, right down to bugs and blades of grass, wind and weather patterns.

Users could circumnavigate each of these planets and never see the same terrain twice.

Even in its first primitive incarnation, the scope of the simulation was staggering.

Halliday and Morrow referred to the OASIS as an "open-source reality,"

a malleable online universe that anyone could access via the Internet, using their existing home computer or videogame console.

You could log in and instantly escape the drudgery of your day-to-day life.

You could create an entirely new persona for yourself, with complete control over how you looked and sounded to others.

In the OASIS, the fat could become thin, the ugly could become beautiful, and the shy, extroverted.

Or vice versa.

You could change your name, age, sex, race, height, weight, voice, hair color, and bone structure.

Or you could cease being human altogether, and become an elf, ogre, alien, or any other creature from literature, movies, or mythology.

In the OASIS, you could become whomever and whatever you wanted to be, without ever revealing your true identity, because your anonymity was guaranteed.

Users could also alter the content of the virtual worlds inside the OASIS, or create entirely new ones.

A person's online presence was no longer limited to a website or a social-networking profile.

In the OASIS, you could create your own private planet, build a virtual mansion on it, furnish and decorate it however you liked, and invite a few thousand friends over for a party.

And those friends could be in a dozen different time zones, spread all over the globe.

The keys to the success of the OASIS were the two new pieces of interface hardware that GSS had created, both of which were required to access the simulation: the OASIS visor and haptic gloves.

The wireless one-size-fits-all OASIS visor was slightly larger than a pair of sunglasses.

It used harmless low-powered lasers to draw the stunningly real environment of the OASIS right onto its wearer's retinas, completely immersing their entire field of vision in the online world.

The visor was light-years ahead of the clunky virtual-reality goggles available prior to that time, and it represented a paradigm shift in virtual-reality technology-as did the lightweight OASIS haptic gloves, which allowed users to directly control the hands of their avatar and to interact with their simulated environment as if they were actually inside it.

When you picked up objects, opened doors, or operated vehicles, the haptic gloves made you feel these nonexistent objects and surfaces as if they were really right there in front of you.

The gloves let you, as the television ads put it, "reach in and touch the OASIS."

Working together, the visor and the gloves made entering the OASIS an experience unlike anything else available, and once people got a taste of it, there was no going back.

The software that powered the simulation, Halliday's new OASIS Reality Engine, also represented a huge technological breakthrough.

It managed to overcome limitations that had plagued previous simulated realities.

In addition to restricting the overall size of their virtual environments, earlier MMOs had been forced to limit their virtual populations, usually to a few thousand users per server.

If too many people were logged in at the same time, the simulation would slow to a crawl and avatars would freeze in midstride as the system struggled to keep up.

But the OASIS utilized a new kind of fault-tolerant server array that could draw additional processing power from every computer connected to it.

At the time of its initial launch, the OASIS could handle up to five million simultaneous users, with no discernible latency and no chance of a system crash.

A massive marketing campaign promoted the launch of the OASIS.

The pervasive television, billboard, and Internet ads featured a lush green oasis, complete with palm trees and a pool of crystal blue water, surrounded on all sides by a vast barren desert.

GSS's new endeavor was a massive success from day one.

The OASIS was what people had been dreaming of for decades.

The "virtual reality"

they had been promised for so long was finally here, and it was even better than they'd imagined.

The OASIS was an online utopia, a holodeck for the home.

And its biggest selling point?

It was free.

Most online games of the day generated revenue by charging users a monthly subscription fee for access.

GSS only charged a onetime sign-up fee of twenty- five cents, for which you received a lifetime OASIS account.

The ads all used the same tagline: The OASIS-it's the greatest videogame ever created, and it only costs a quarter.

At a time of drastic social and cultural upheaval, when most of the world's population longed for an escape from reality, the OASIS provided it, in a form that was cheap, legal, safe, and not (medically proven to be) addictive.

The ongoing energy crisis contributed greatly to the OASIS's runaway popularity.

The skyrocketing cost of oil made airline and automobile travel too expensive for the average citizen, and the OASIS became the only getaway most people could afford.

As the era of cheap, abundant energy drew to a close, poverty and unrest began to spread like a virus.

Every day, more and more people had reason to seek solace inside Halliday and Morrow's virtual utopia.

Any business that wanted to set up shop inside the OASIS had to rent or purchase virtual real estate (which Morrow dubbed "surreal estate") from GSS.

Anticipating this, the company had set aside Sector One as the simulation's designated business zone and began to sell and rent millions of blocks of surreal estate there.

City-sized shopping malls were erected in the blink of an eye, and storefronts spread across planets like time-lapse footage of mold devouring an orange.

Urban development had never been so easy.

In addition to the billions of dollars that GSS raked in selling land that didn't actually exist, they made a killing selling virtual objects and vehicles.

The OASIS became such an integral part of people's day-to-day social lives that users were more than willing to shell out real money to buy accessories for their avatars: clothing, furniture, houses, flying cars, magic swords and machine guns.

These items were nothing but ones and zeros stored on the OASIS servers, but they were also status symbols.

Most items only cost a few credits, but since they cost nothing for GSS to manufacture, it was all profit.

Even in the throes of an ongoing economic recession, the OASIS allowed Americans to continue engaging in their favorite pastime: shopping.

The OASIS quickly became the single most popular use for the Internet, so much so that the terms "OASIS"

and "Internet"

gradually became synonymous.

And the incredibly easy-to-use three-dimensional OASIS OS, which GSS gave away for free, became the single most popular computer operating system in the world.

Before long, billions of people around the world were working and playing in the OASIS every day.

Some of them met, fell in love, and got married without ever setting foot on the same continent.

The lines of distinction between a person's real identity and that of their avatar began to blur.

It was the dawn of new era, one where most of the human race now spent all of their free time inside a videogame.

The rest of my school day passed quickly until my final class, Latin.

Most students took a foreign language they might actually be able to use someday, like Mandarin, or Hindi, or Spanish.

I'd decided to take Latin because James Halliday had taken Latin.

He'd also occasionally used Latin words and phrases in his early adventure games.

Unfortunately, even with the limitless possibilities of the OASIS at her disposal, my Latin teacher, Ms.

Rank, still had a hard time making her lessons interesting.

And today she was reviewing a bunch of verbs I'd already memorized, so I found my attention drifting almost immediately.

While a class was in session, the simulation prevented students from accessing any data or programs that weren't authorized by their teacher, to prevent kids from watching movies, playing games, or chatting with each other instead of paying attention to the lesson.

Luckily, during my junior year, I'd discovered a bug in the school's online library software, and by exploiting it, I could access any book in the school's online library, including Anorak's Almanac.

So whenever I got bored (like right now) I would pull it up in a window on my display and read over my favorite passages to pass the time.

Over the past five years, the Almanac had become my bible.

Like most books nowadays, it was only available in electronic format.

But I'd wanted to be able to read the Almanac night or day, even during one of the stacks' frequent power outages, so I'd fixed up an old discarded laser printer and used it to print out a hard copy.

I put it in an old three-ring binder that I kept in my backpack and studied until I knew every word by heart.

The Almanac contained thousands of references to Halliday's favorite books, TV shows, movies, songs, graphic novels, and videogames.

Most of these items were over forty years old, and so free digital copies of them could be downloaded from the OASIS.

If there was something I needed that wasn't legally available for free, I could almost always get it by using Guntorrent, a file- sharing program used by gunters around the world.

When it came to my research, I never took any shortcuts.

Over the past five years, I'd worked my way down the entire recommended gunter reading list.

Douglas Adams.

Kurt Vonnegut.

Neal Stephenson.

Richard K.

Morgan.

Stephen King.

Orson Scott Card.

Terry Pratchett.

Terry Brooks.

Bester, Bradbury, Haldeman, Heinlein, Tolkien, Vance, Gibson, Gaiman, Sterling, Moorcock, Scalzi, Zelazny.

I read every novel by every single one of Halliday's favorite authors.

And I didn't stop there.

I also watched every single film he referenced in the Almanac.

If it was one of Halliday's favorites, like WarGames, Ghostbusters, Real Genius, Better Off Dead, or Revenge of the Nerds, I rewatched it until I knew every scene by heart.

I devoured each of what Halliday referred to as "The Holy Trilogies": Star Wars (original and prequel trilogies, in that order), Lord of the Rings, The Matrix, Mad Max, Back to the Future, and Indiana Jones.

(Halliday once said that he preferred to pretend the other Indiana Jones films, from Kingdom of the Crystal Skull onward, didn't exist.

I tended to agree.) I also absorbed the complete filmographies of each of his favorite directors.

Cameron, Gilliam, Jackson, Fincher, Kubrick, Lucas, Spielberg, Del Toro, Tarantino.

And, of course, Kevin Smith.

I spent three months studying every John Hughes teen movie and memorizing all the key lines of dialogue.

Only the meek get pinched.

The bold survive.

You could say I covered all the bases.

I studied Monty Python.

And not just Holy Grail, either.

Every single one of their films, albums, and books, and every episode of the original BBC series.

(Including those two "lost"

episodes they did for German television.) I wasn't going to cut any corners.

I wasn't going to miss something obvious.

Somewhere along the way, I started to go overboard.

I may, in fact, have started to go a little insane.

I watched every episode of The Greatest American Hero, Airwolf, The A- Team, Knight Rider, Misfits of Science, and The Muppet Show.

What about The Simpsons, you ask?

I knew more about Springfield than I knew about my own city.

Star Trek?

Oh, I did my homework.

TOS, TNG, DS9.

Even Voyager and Enterprise.

I watched them all in chronological order.

The movies, too.

Phasers locked on target.

I gave myself a crash course in '80s Saturday-morning cartoons.

I learned the name of every last goddamn Gobot and Transformer.

Land of the Lost, Thundarr the Barbarian, He-Man, Schoolhouse Rock!, G.I.

Joe-I knew them all.

Because knowing is half the battle.

Who was my friend, when things got rough?

H.R.

Pufnstuf.

Japan?

Did I cover Japan?

Yes.

Yes indeed.

Anime and live-action.

Godzilla, Gamera, Star Blazers, The Space Giants, and G-Force.

Go, Speed Racer, Go.

I wasn't some dilettante.

I wasn't screwing around.

I memorized every last Bill Hicks stand-up routine.

Music?

Well, covering all the music wasn't easy.

It took some time.

The '80s was a long decade (ten whole years), and Halliday didn't seem to have had very discerning taste.

He listened to everything.

So I did too.

Pop, rock, new wave, punk, heavy metal.

From the Police to Journey to R.E.M.

to the Clash.

I tackled it all.

I burned through the entire They Might Be Giants discography in under two weeks.

Devo took a little longer.

I watched a lot of YouTube videos of cute geeky girls playing '80s cover tunes on ukuleles.

Technically, this wasn't part of my research, but I had a serious cute-geeky-girls-playing-ukuleles fetish that I can neither explain nor defend.

I memorized lyrics.

Silly lyrics, by bands with names like Van Halen, Bon Jovi, Def Leppard, and Pink Floyd.

I kept at it.

I burned the midnight oil.

Did you know that Midnight Oil was an Australian band, with a 1987 hit titled "Beds Are Burning"?

I was obsessed.

I wouldn't quit.

My grades suffered.

I didn't care.

I read every issue of every comic book title Halliday had ever collected.

I wasn't going to have anyone questioning my commitment.

Especially when it came to the videogames.

Videogames were my area of expertise.

My double-weapon specialization.

My dream Jeopardy!

category.

I downloaded every game mentioned or referenced in the Almanac, from Akalabeth to Zaxxon.

I played each title until I had mastered it, then moved on to the next one.

You'd be amazed how much research you can get done when you have no life whatsoever.

Twelve hours a day, seven days a week, is a lot of study time.

I worked my way through every videogame genre and platform.

Classic arcade coin-ops, home computer, console, and handheld.

Text-based adventures, first-person shooters, third-person RPGs.

Ancient 8-, 16-, and 32-bit classics written in the previous century.

The harder a game was to beat, the more I enjoyed it.

And as I played these ancient digital relics, night after night, year after year, I discovered I had a talent for them.

I could master most action titles in a few hours, and there wasn't an adventure or role-playing game I couldn't solve.

I never needed any walkthroughs or cheat codes.

Everything just clicked.

And I was even better at the old arcade games.

When I was in the zone on a high-speed classic like Defender, I felt like a hawk in flight, or the way I thought a shark must feel as it cruises the ocean floor.

For the first time, I knew what it was to be a natural at something.

To have a gift.

But it wasn't my research into old movies, comics, or videogames that had yielded my first real clue.

That had come while I was studying the history of old pen-and-paper role-playing games.

Reprinted on the first page of Anorak's Almanac were the four rhyming lines of verse Halliday had recited in the Invitation video.

Three hidden keys open three secret gates Wherein the errant will be tested for worthy traits And those with the skill to survive these straits Will reach The End where the prize awaits At first, this seemed to be the only direct reference to the contest in the entire almanac.

But then, buried among all those rambling journal entries and essays on pop culture, I discovered a hidden message.

Scattered throughout the text of the Almanac were a series of marked letters.

Each of these letters had a tiny, nearly invisible "notch"

cut into its outline.

I'd first noticed these notches the year after Halliday died.

I was reading my hard copy of the Almanac at the time, and so at first I thought the notches were nothing but tiny printing imperfections, perhaps due to the paper or the ancient printer I'd used to print out the Almanac.

But when I checked the electronic version of the book available on Halliday's website, I found the same notches on the exact same letters.

And if you zoomed in on one of those letters, the notches stood out as plain as day.

Halliday had put them there.

He'd marked these letters for a reason.

There turned out to be one hundred and twelve of these notched letters scattered throughout the book.

By writing them down in the order they appeared, I discovered that they spelled something.

I nearly died of excitement as I wrote it down in my grail diary: The Copper Key awaits explorers In a tomb filled with horrors But you have much to learn If you hope to earn A place among the high scorers Other gunters had also discovered this hidden message, of course, but they were all wise enough to keep it to themselves.

For a while, anyway.

About six months after I discovered the hidden message, this loudmouth MIT freshman found it too.

His name was Steven Pendergast, and he decided to get his fifteen minutes of fame by sharing his "discovery"

with the media.

The newsfeeds broadcast interviews with this moron for a month, even though he didn't have the first clue about the message's meaning.

After that, going public with a clue became known as "pulling a Pendergast."

Once the message became public knowledge, gunters nicknamed it "the Limerick."

The entire world had known about it for almost four years now, but no one seemed to understand its true meaning, and the Copper Key still had yet to be found.

I knew Halliday had frequently used similar riddles in many of his early adventure games, and each of those riddles had made sense in the context of its game.

So I devoted an entire section of my grail diary to deciphering the Limerick, line by line.

The Copper Key awaits explorers This line seemed pretty straightforward.

No hidden meaning that I could detect.

In a tomb filled with horrors.

This line was trickier.

Taken at face value, it seemed to say that the key was hidden in a tomb somewhere, one filled with horrifying stuff.

But then, during the course of my research, I discovered an old Dungeons & Dragons supplement called Tomb of Horrors, which had been published in 1978.

From the moment I saw the title, I was certain the second line of the Limerick was a reference to it.

Halliday and Morrow had played Advanced Dungeons & Dragons all through high school, along with several other pen-and-paper role-playing games, like GURPS, Champions, Car Wars, and Rolemaster.

Tomb of Horrors was a thin booklet called a "module."

It contained detailed maps and room-by-room descriptions of an underground labyrinth infested with undead monsters.

D&D players could explore the labyrinth with their characters as the dungeon master read from the module and guided them through the story it contained, describing everything they saw and encountered along the way.

As I learned more about how these early role-playing games worked, I realized that a D&D module was the primitive equivalent of a quest in the OASIS.

And D&D characters were just like avatars.

In a way, these old role- playing games had been the first virtual-reality simulations, created long before computers were powerful enough to do the job.

In those days, if you wanted to escape to another world, you had to create it yourself, using your brain, some paper, pencils, dice, and a few rule books.

This realization kind of blew my mind.

It changed my whole perspective on the Hunt for Halliday's Easter egg.

From then on, I began to think of the Hunt as an elaborate D&D module.

And Halliday was obviously the dungeon master, even if he was now controlling the game from beyond the grave.

I found a digital copy of the sixty-seven-year-old Tomb of Horrors module buried deep in an ancient FTP archive.

As I studied it, I began to develop a theory: Somewhere in the OASIS, Halliday had re-created the Tomb of Horrors, and he'd hidden the Copper Key inside it.

I spent the next few months studying the module and memorizing all of its maps and room descriptions, in anticipation of the day I would finally figure out where it was located.

But that was the rub: The Limerick didn't appear to give any hint as to where Halliday had hidden the damn thing.

The only clue seemed to be "you have much to learn if you hope to earn a place among the high scorers."

I recited those words over and over in my head until I wanted to howl in frustration.

Much to learn.

Yeah, OK, fine.

I have much to learn about what?

There were literally thousands of worlds in the OASIS, and Halliday could have hidden his re-creation of the Tomb of Horrors on any one of them.

Searching every planet, one by one, would take forever.

Even if I'd had the means to do so.

A planet named Gygax in Sector Two seemed like the obvious place to start looking.

Halliday had coded the planet himself, and he'd named it after Gary original Tomb of Horrors module.

According to Gunterpedia (a gunter wiki), the planet Gygax was covered with re-creations of old D&D modules, but Tomb of Horrors was not one of them.

There didn't appear to be a re-creation of the tomb on any of the other D&D-themed worlds in the OASIS either.

Gunters had turned all of those planets upside down and scoured every square inch of their surfaces.

Had a re-creation of the Tomb of Horrors been hidden on one of them, it would have been found and logged long ago.

So the tomb had to be hidden somewhere else.

And I didn't have the first clue where.

But I told myself that if I just kept at it and continued doing research, I'd eventually learn what I needed to know to figure out the tomb's hiding place.

In fact, that was probably what Halliday meant by "you have much to learn if you hope to earn a place among the high scorers."

If any other gunters out there shared my interpretation of the Limerick, so far they'd been smart enough to keep quiet about it.

I'd never seen any posts about the Tomb of Horrors on any gunter message boards.

I realized, of course, that this might be because my theory about the old D&D module was completely lame and totally off base.

So I'd continued to watch and read and listen and study, preparing for the day when I finally stumbled across the clue that would lead me to the Copper Key.

And then it finally happened.

Right while I was sitting there daydreaming in Latin class.

Our teacher, Ms.

Rank, was standing at the front of the class, slowly conjugating Latin verbs.

She said them in English first, then in Latin, and each word automatically appeared on the board behind her as she spoke it.

Whenever we were doing tedious verb conjugation, I always got the lyrics to an old Schoolhouse Rock!

song stuck in my head: "To run, to go, to get, to give.

Verb!

You're what's happenin'!"

I was quietly humming this tune to myself when Ms.

Rank began to conjugate the Latin for the verb "to learn."

"To Learn.

Discere,"

she said.

"Now, this one should be easy to remember, because it's similar to the English word 'discern,' which also means 'to learn.' "

Hearing her repeat the phrase "to learn"

was enough to make me think of the Limerick.

You have much to learn if you hope to earn a place among the high scorers.

Ms.

Rank continued, using the verb in a sentence.

"We go to school to learn,"

she said.

"Petimus scholam ut litteras discamus."

And that was when it hit me.

Like an anvil falling out of the sky, directly onto my skull.

I gazed around at my classmates.

What group of people has "much to learn"?

Students.

High-school students.

I was on a planet filled with students, all of whom had "much to learn."

What if the Limerick was saying that the tomb was hidden right here, on Ludus?

The very planet where I'd been twiddling my thumbs for the past five years?

Then I remembered that ludus was also a Latin word, meaning "school."

I pulled up my Latin dictionary to double-check the definition, and that was when I discovered the word had more than one meaning.

Ludus could mean "school,"

but it could also mean "sport"

or "game."

Game.

I fell out of my folding chair and landed with a thud on the floor of my hideout.

My OASIS console tracked this movement and attempted to make my avatar drop to the floor of my Latin classroom, but the classroom conduct software prevented it from moving and a warning flashed on my display: PLEASE REMAIN SEATED DURING CLASS!

I told myself not to get too excited.

I might be jumping to conclusions.

There were hundreds of private schools and universities located on other planets inside the OASIS.

The Limerick might refer to one of them.

But I didn't think so.

Ludus made more sense.

James Halliday had donated billions to fund the creation of the OASIS public school system here, as a way to demonstrate the huge potential of the OASIS as an educational tool.

And prior to his death, Halliday had set up a foundation to ensure that the OASIS public school system would always have the money it needed to operate.

The Halliday Learning Foundation also provided impoverished children around the globe with free OASIS hardware and Internet access so that they could attend school inside the OASIS.

GSS's own programmers had designed and constructed Ludus and all of the schools on it.

So it was entirely possible that Halliday was the one who'd given the planet its name.

And he would also have had access to the planet's source code, if he'd wanted to hide something here.

The realizations continued to detonate in my brain like atomic bombs going off, one after another.

According to the original D&D module, the entrance to the Tomb of Horrors was hidden near "a low, flat-topped hill, about two hundred yards wide and three hundred yards long."

The top of the hill was covered with large black stones that were arranged in such a way that, if you viewed them from a great height, they resembled the eye sockets, nose holes, and teeth of a human skull.

But if there was a hill like that hidden somewhere on Ludus, wouldn't someone have stumbled across it by now?

Maybe not.

Ludus had hundreds of large forests scattered all over its surface, in the vast sections of empty land that stood between the thousands of school campuses.

Some of these forests were enormous, covering dozens of square miles.

Most students never even set foot inside them, because there was nothing of interest to do or see there.

Like its fields and rivers and lakes, Ludus's forests were just computer-generated landscaping, placed there to fill up the empty space.

Of course, during my avatar's long stay on Ludus, I'd explored a few of the forests within walking distance of my school, out of boredom.

But all they contained were thousands of randomly generated trees and the occasional bird, rabbit, or squirrel.

(These tiny creatures weren't worth any experience points if you killed them.

I'd checked.) So it was entirely possible that somewhere, hidden in one of Ludus's large, unexplored patches of forestland, there was a small stone-covered hill that resembled a human skull.

I tried pulling up a map of Ludus on my display, but I couldn't.

The system wouldn't let me, because class was still in session.

The hack I used to access books in the school's online library didn't work for the OASIS atlas software.

"Shit!"

I blurted out in frustration.

The classroom conduct software filtered this out, so neither Ms.

Rank nor my classmates heard it.

But another warning flashed on my display: PROFANITY MUTED-MISCONDUCT WARNING!

I looked at the time on my display.

Exactly seventeen minutes and twenty seconds left until the end of the school day.

I sat there with clenched teeth and counted off each second, my mind still racing.

Ludus was an inconspicuous world in Sector One.

There wasn't supposed to be anything but schools here, so this was the last place a gunter would think to look for the Copper Key.

It was definitely the last place I had ever thought to look, and that alone proved it was a perfect hiding place.

But why would Halliday have chosen to hide the Copper Key here?

Unless ...

He'd wanted a schoolkid to find it.

I was still reeling from the implications of that thought when the bell finally rang.

Around me, the other students began to file out of the room or vanish in their seats.

Ms.

Rank's avatar also disappeared, and in moments I was all alone in the classroom.

I pulled up a map of Ludus on my display.

It appeared as a three-dimensional globe floating in front of me, and I gave it a spin with my hand.

Ludus was a relatively small planet by OASIS standards, about a third the size of Earth's moon, with a circumference of exactly one thousand kilometers.

A single contiguous continent covered the surface.

There were no oceans, just a few dozen large lakes placed here and there.

Since OASIS planets weren't real, they didn't have to obey the laws of nature.

On Ludus, it was perpetually daytime, regardless of where you stood on the surface, and the sky was always a perfect cloudless blue.

The stationary sun that hung overheard was nothing but a virtual light source, programmed into the imaginary sky.

On the map, the school campuses appeared as thousands of identical numbered rectangles dotting the planet's surface.

They were separated by rolling green fields, rivers, mountain ranges, and forests.

The forests were of all shapes and sizes, and many of them bordered one of the schools.

Next to the map, I pulled up the Tomb of Horrors module.

Near the front, it contained a crude illustration of the hill concealing the tomb.

I took a screenshot of this illustration and placed it in the corner of my display.

I frantically searched my favorite warez sites until I found a high-end image- recognition plug-in for the OASIS atlas.

Once I downloaded the software via Guntorrent, it took me a few more minutes to figure out how to make it scan the entire surface of Ludus for a hill with large black stones arranged in a skull-like pattern.

One with a size, shape, and appearance that matched the illustration from the Tomb of Horrors module.

After about ten minutes of searching, the software highlighted a possible match.

I held my breath as I placed the close-up image from the Ludus map beside the illustration from the D&D module.

The shape of the hill and the skull pattern of the stones both matched the illustration perfectly.

I decreased the magnification on the map a bit, then pulled back far enough to confirm that the northern edge of the hill ended in a cliff of sand and crumbling gravel.

Just like in the original Dungeons & Dragons module.

I let out a triumphant yell that echoed in the empty classroom and bounced off the walls of my tiny hideout.

I'd done it.

I'd actually found the Tomb of Horrors!

When I finally managed to calm down, I did some quick calculations.

The hill was near the center of a large amoeba-shaped forest located on the opposite side of Ludus, over four hundred kilometers from my school.

My avatar could run at a maximum speed of five kilometers an hour, so it would take me over three days to get there on foot if I ran nonstop the entire time.

If I could teleport, I could be there within minutes.

The fare wouldn't be much for such a short distance, maybe a few hundred credits.

Unfortunately, that was still more than my current OASIS account balance, which was a big fat zero.

I considered my options.

Aech would lend me the money for the fare, but I didn't want to ask for his help.

If I couldn't reach the tomb on my own, I didn't deserve to reach it at all.

Besides, I'd have to lie to Aech about what the money was for, and since I'd never asked him for a loan before, any excuse I gave would make him suspicious.

Thinking about Aech, I couldn't help but smile.

He was really going to freak when he found out about this.

The tomb was hidden less than seventy kilometers from his school!

Practically his backyard.

That thought triggered an idea, one that made me leap to my feet.

I ran out of the classroom and down the hall.

Not only had I figured out a way to teleport to the other side of Ludus, I knew how to get my school to pay for it.

Each OASIS public school had a bunch of different athletic teams, including wrestling, soccer, football, baseball, volleyball, and a few other sports that couldn't be played in the real world, like Quidditch and zero-gravity Capture the Flag.

Students went out for these teams just like they did at schools in the real world, and they played using elaborate sports-capable haptic rigs that required them to actually do all of their own running, jumping, kicking, tackling, and so on.

The teams had nightly practice, held pep rallies, and traveled to other schools on Ludus to compete against them.

Our school gave out free teleportation vouchers to any student who wanted to attend an away game, so we could sit up in the stands and root for old OPS #1873.

I'd only taken advantage of this once, when our Capture the Flag team had played against Aech's school in the OPS championships.

When I arrived in the school office, I scanned the activities schedule and found what I was looking for right away.

That evening, our football team was playing an away game against OPS #0571, which was located roughly an hour's run from the forest where the tomb was hidden.

I reached out and selected the game, and a teleportation voucher instantly appeared in my avatar's inventory, good for one free round-trip to OPS #0571.

I stopped at my locker long enough to drop off my textbooks and grab my flashlight, sword, shield, and armor.

Then I sprinted out the front entrance and across the expansive green lawn in front of the school.

When I reached the red borderline that marked the edge of the school grounds, I glanced around to make sure no one was watching me, then stepped across the line.

As I did, the WADE3 nametag floating above my head changed to read PARZIVAL.

Now that I was off school grounds, I could use my avatar name once again.

I could also turn off my nametag completely, which was what I did now, because I wanted to travel incognito.

The nearest transport terminal was a short walk from the school, at the end of a cobblestone path.

It was a large domed pavilion supported by a dozen ivory pillars.

Each pillar bore an OASIS teleportation icon, a capital "T"

in the center of a blue hexagon.

School had only been out for a few minutes now, so there was a steady stream of avatars filing into the terminal.

Inside were long rows of blue teleportation booths.

Their shape and color always reminded me of Doctor Who's TARDIS.

I stepped into the first empty booth I saw, and the doors closed automatically.

I didn't need to enter my destination on the touchscreen because it was already encoded on my voucher.

I just slid the voucher into a slot and a world map of Ludus appeared on the screen, showing a line from my present location to my destination, a flashing green dot next to OPS #0571.

The booth instantly calculated the distance I would be traveling (462 kilometers) and the amount my school would be invoiced for the fare (103 credits).

The voucher was verified, the fare showed as PAID, and my avatar vanished.

I instantly reappeared in an identical booth, inside an identical transport terminal on the opposite side of the planet.

As I ran outside, I spotted OPS #0571 off to the south.

It looked exactly like my own school, except the surrounding landscape was different.

I spotted some students from my school, walking toward the nearby football stadium, on their way to watch the game and root for our team.

I wasn't sure why they bothered.

They could just as easily have watched the game via vidfeed.

And any empty seats in the stands would be filled with randomly generated NPC fans who would wolf down virtual sodas and hot dogs while cheering wildly.

Occasionally, they would even do "the wave."

I was already running in the opposite direction, across a rolling green field that stretched out behind the school.

A small mountain range loomed in the distance, and I could see the amoeba-shaped forest at its base.

I turned on my avatar's autorun feature, then opened my inventory and selected three of the items listed there.

My armor appeared on my body, my shield appeared in a sling on my back, and my sword appeared in its scabbard, hanging at my side.

I was almost to the edge of the forest when my phone rang.

The ID said it was Aech.

Probably calling to see why I hadn't logged into the Basement yet.

But if I answered the call, he would see a live video feed of my avatar, running across a field at top speed, with OPS #0571 shrinking in the distance behind me.

I could conceal my current location by taking the call as audio only, but that might make him suspicious.

So I let the call roll to my vidmail.

Aech's face appeared in a small window on my display.

He was calling from a PvP arena somewhere.

Dozens of avatars were locked in fierce combat on a multitiered playing field behind him.

"Yo, Z!

What are you up to?

Jerking off to Ladyhawke?"

He flashed his Cheshire grin.

"Give me a shout.

I'm still planning to pop some corn and have a Spaced marathon.

You down?"

He hung up and his image winked out.

I sent a text-only reply, saying I had a ton of homework and couldn't hang tonight.

Then I pulled up the Tomb of Horrors module and began to read through it again, page by page.

I did this slowly and carefully, because I was pretty sure it contained a detailed description of everything I was about to face.

"In the far reaches of the world, under a lost and lonely hill,"

read the module's introduction, "lies the sinister TOMB OF HORRORS.

This labyrinthine crypt is filled with terrible traps, strange and ferocious monsters, rich and magical treasures, and somewhere within rests the evil Demi-Lich."

That last bit worried me.

A lich was an undead creature, usually an incredibly powerful wizard or king who had employed dark magic to bind his intellect to his own reanimated corpse, thus achieving a perverted form of immortality.

I'd encountered liches in countless videogames and fantasy novels.

They were to be avoided at all costs.

I studied the map of the tomb and the descriptions of its many rooms.

The tomb's entrance was buried in the side of a crumbling cliff.

A tunnel led down into a labyrinth of thirty-three rooms and chambers, each filled with a variety of vicious monsters, deadly traps, and (mostly cursed) treasure.

If you somehow managed to survive all of the traps and find your way through the labyrinth, you would eventually reach the crypt of Acererak the Demi-Lich.

The room was littered with treasure, but if you touched it, the undead King Acererak appeared and opened up a can of undead whup-ass on you.

If, by some miracle, you managed to defeat the lich, you could take his treasure and leave the dungeon.

Mission accomplished, quest completed.

If Halliday had re-created the Tomb of Horrors just as it was described in the module, I was in big trouble.

My avatar was a third-level wimp, with nonmagical weapons and twenty-seven measly hit points.

Nearly all of the traps and monsters described in the module could kill me easily.

And if I somehow managed to make it past all of them and reach the crypt, the ultrapowerful lich could kill my avatar in seconds, just by looking at him.

But I had a few things going for me.

First, I really didn't have much to lose.

If my avatar was killed, I would lose my sword, shield, and leather armor, and the three levels I'd managed to gain over the past few years.

I'd have to create a new first-level avatar, which would spawn at my last log-in location, in front of my school locker.

But then I could just return to the tomb and try again.

And again and again, every night, collecting XPs and increasing in levels until I finally figured out where the Copper Key was hidden.

(There was no such thing as a backup avatar.

OASIS users could have only one avatar at a time.

It was possible for hackers to use modded visors to spoof their retinal patterns and thus create a second account for themselves.

But if you got caught, you'd be banned from the OASIS for life, and you'd also be disqualified from participating in Halliday's contest.

No gunter would ever take that risk.) My other advantage (I hoped) was that I knew exactly what to expect once I entered the tomb, because the module provided me with a detailed map of the entire labyrinth.

It also told me where all the traps were located, and how to disarm or avoid them.

I also knew which rooms contained monsters, and where all of the weapons and treasure were hidden.

Unless, of course, Halliday had changed things around.

Then I was screwed.

But at the moment, I was far too excited to be worried.

After all, I'd just made the biggest, most important discovery of my life.

I was just a few minutes away from the hiding place of the Copper Key!

I finally reached the edge of the forest and ran inside.

It was filled with thousands of perfectly rendered maples, oaks, spruces, and tamaracks.

The trees looked as though they had been generated and placed using standard OASIS landscape templates, but the detail put into them was stunning.

I stopped to examine one of the trees closely and saw ants crawling along the intricate ridges in its bark.

I took this as a sign I was on the right track.

There was no path through the forest, so I kept the map in the corner of my display and followed it to the skull-topped hill that marked the tomb entrance.

It was right where the map said it would be, in a large glade at the center of the forest.

As I stepped into the clearing, my heart felt like it was trying to beat its way out of my rib cage.

I climbed up onto the low hilltop, and it was like stepping into the illustration from the D&D module.

Halliday had reproduced everything exactly.

Twelve massive black stones were arranged on the hilltop in the same pattern, resembling the features of a human skull.

I walked to the northern edge of the hilltop and descended the crumbling cliff face I found there.

By consulting the module map, I was able to locate the exact spot in the cliff where the entrance to the tomb was supposed to be buried.

Then, using my shield as a shovel, I began to dig.

Within a few minutes, I uncovered the mouth of a tunnel that led into a dark underground corridor.

The floor of the corridor was a mosaic of colorful stones, with a winding path of red tiles set into it.

Once again, just like in the D&D module.

I moved the Tomb of Horrors dungeon map to the top right corner of my display and made it slightly transparent.

Then I strapped my shield to my back and took out my flashlight.

I glanced around once more to make sure no one was watching me; then, clutching my sword in my other hand, I entered the Tomb of Horrors.

The walls of the corridor leading into the tomb were covered with dozens of strange paintings depicting enslaved humans, orcs, elves, and other creatures.

Each fresco appeared in the exact location described in the original D&D module.

I knew that hidden in the tiled stone surface of the floor were several spring-loaded trapdoors.

If you stepped on one, it snapped open and dropped you into a pit filled with poisoned iron spikes.

But because the location of each hidden trapdoor was clearly marked on my map, I was able to avoid all of them.

So far, everything had followed the original module to the letter.

If the same was true for the rest of the tomb, I might be able to survive long enough to locate the Copper Key.

There were only a few monsters lurking in this dungeon-a gargoyle, a skeleton, a zombie, some asps, a mummy, and the evil demi-lich Acererak himself.

Since the map told me where each of them was hiding, I should be able to avoid fighting them.

Unless, of course, one of them was guarding the Copper Key.

And I could already guess who probably had that honor.

I tried to proceed carefully, as if I had no idea what to expect.

Avoiding the Sphere of Annihilation located at the end of the corridor, I located a hidden door beside the last pit trap.

It opened into a small sloping passageway.

My flashlight reached into the darkness ahead, flickering off the damp stone walls.

My surroundings made me feel like I was in a low-budget sword-and-sorcery flick, like Hawk the Slayer or The Beastmaster.

I began to make my way through the dungeon, room by room.

Even though I knew where all of the traps were located, I still had to proceed carefully to avoid them all.

In a dark, forbidding chamber known as the Chapel of Evil, I found thousands of gold and silver coins hidden in the pews, right where they were supposed to be.

It was more money than my avatar could carry, even with the Bag of Holding that I found.

I gathered up as many of the gold coins as I could and they appeared in my inventory.

The currency was automatically converted and my credit counter jumped to over twenty thousand, by far the largest amount of money I'd ever had.

And in addition to the credits, my avatar received an equal number of experience points for obtaining the coins.

As I continued deeper into the tomb, I obtained several magic items along the way.

A +1 Flaming Sword.

A Gem of Seeing.

A +1 Ring of Protection.

I even found a suit of +3 Full Plate armor.

These were the first magic items my avatar had ever possessed, and they made me feel unstoppable.

When I put on the suit of magical armor, it shrank to fit my avatar perfectly.

Its gleaming chrome appearance reminded me of the bad-ass armor worn by the knights in Excalibur.

I actually switched to a third-person view for a few seconds, just to admire how cool my avatar looked wearing it.

The farther I went, the more confident I became.

The tomb's layout and contents continued to match the module description exactly, down to the last detail.

That is, until I reached the Pillared Throne Room.

It was a large square chamber with a high ceiling, filled with dozens of massive stone columns.

A huge raised dais stood at the far end of the room, atop which rested an obsidian throne inlaid with silver and ivory skulls.

All this matched the module description exactly, with one huge difference.

The throne was supposed to be empty, but it wasn't.

The demi-lich Acererak was sitting on it, glaring down at me silently.

A dusty gold crown glinted on his withered head.

He appeared exactly as he did on the cover of the original Tomb of Horrors module.

But according to its text, Acererak wasn't supposed to be here.

He was supposed to be waiting in a burial chamber much deeper in the dungeon.

I considered running but decided against it.

If Halliday had placed the lich in this room, perhaps he'd placed the Copper Key here too.

I had to find out.

I walked across the chamber to the foot of the dais.

From here I could see the lich more clearly.

His teeth were two rows of pointed cut diamonds arrayed in a lipless grin, and a large ruby was set in each of his eye sockets.

For the first time since entering the tomb, I wasn't sure what to do next.

My chances of surviving one-on-one combat with a demi-lich were nonexistent.

My wimpy +1 Flaming Sword couldn't even affect him, and the two magic rubies in his eye sockets had the power to suck out my avatar's life force and kill me instantly.

Even a party of six or seven high-level avatars would have had a difficult time defeating him.

I silently wished (not for the last time) that the OASIS was like an old adventure game and that I could save my place.

But it wasn't, and I couldn't.

If my avatar died here, it would mean starting over with nothing.

But there was no point in hesitating now.

If the lich killed me, I would come back tomorrow night and try again.

The entire tomb should reset when the OASIS server clock struck midnight.

If it did, all of the hidden traps I'd disarmed would reset themselves, and the treasure and magic items would reappear.

I tapped the Record icon at the edge of my display so that whatever happened next would be stored in a vidcap file I could play back and study later.

But when I tapped the icon, I got a RECORDING NOT ALLOWED message.

It seemed that Halliday had disabled recording inside the tomb.

I took a deep breath, raised my sword, and placed my right foot on the bottom step of the dais.

As I did, there was a sound like cracking bones as Acererak slowly lifted his head.

The rubies in his eye sockets began to glow with an intense red light.

I took several steps backward, expecting him to leap down and attack me.

But he didn't rise from his throne.

Instead, he lowered his head and fixed me with his chilling gaze.

"Greetings, Parzival,"

he said in a rasping voice.

"What is it that you seek?"

This caught me off guard.

According to the module, the lich wouldn't speak.

He was just supposed to attack, leaving me with no choice but to kill him or run for my life.

"I seek the Copper Key,"

I replied.

Then I remembered I was speaking to a king, so I quickly bowed my head, dropped to one knee, and added, "Your Majesty."

"Of course you do,"

Acererak said, motioning for me to rise.

"And you've come to the right place."

He stood, and his mummified skin cracked like old leather as he moved.

I clutched my sword more tightly, still anticipating an attack.

"How can I know that you are worthy of possessing the Copper Key?"

he asked.

Holy shit!

How the hell was I supposed to answer that?

And what if I gave the wrong answer?

Would he suck out my soul and incinerate me?

I racked my brain for a suitable reply.

The best I could come up with was, "Allow me to prove my worth, noble Acererak."

The lich let out a long, disturbing cackle that echoed off the chamber's stone walls.

"Very well!"

he said.

"You shall prove your worth by facing me in a joust!"

I'd never heard of an undead lich king challenging someone to a joust.

Especially not in a subterranean burial chamber.

"All right,"

I said uncertainly.

"But won't we be needing horses for that?"

"Not horses,"

he replied, stepping away from his throne.

"Birds."

He waved a skeletal hand at his throne.

There was a brief flash of light, accompanied by a transformation sound effect (which I was pretty sure had been lifted from the old Super Friends cartoon).

The throne melted and morphed into an old coin-operated videogame cabinet.

Two joysticks protruded from its control panel, one yellow and one blue.

I couldn't help but grin as I read the name on the game's backlit marquee: JOUST.

Williams Electronics, 1982.

"Best two out of three games,"

Acererak rasped.

"If you win, I shall grant you what you seek."

"What if you win?"

I asked, already knowing the answer.

"If I am victorious,"

the lich said, the rubies in his eye sockets blazing even brighter, "then you shall die!"

A ball of swirling orange flame appeared in his right hand.

He raised it threateningly.

"Of course,"

I said.

"That was my first guess.

Just wanted to double-check."

The fireball in Acererak's hand vanished.

He stretched out his leathery palm, which now held two shiny quarters.

"The games are on me,"

he said.

He stepped up to the Joust machine and dropped both quarters into the left coin slot.

The game emitted two low electronic chimes and the credit counter jumped from zero to two.

Acererak took hold of the yellow joystick on the left side of the control panel and closed his bony fingers around it.

"Art thou ready?"

he croaked.

"Yeah,"

I said, taking a deep breath.

I cracked my knuckles and grabbed the Player Two joystick with my left hand, poising my right hand over the Flap button.

Acererak rocked his head from left to right, cracking his neck.

It sounded like a snapping tree branch.

Then he slapped the Two Player button and the joust began.

Joust was a classic '80s arcade game with a strange premise.

Each player controls a knight armed with a lance.

Player One is mounted on an ostrich, while Player Two is mounted on a stork.

You flap your wings to fly around the screen and "joust"

with the other player, and also against several computer-controlled enemy knights (who are all mounted on buzzards).

When you crash into an opponent, whoever's lance is higher on the screen wins the joust.

The loser is killed and loses a life.

Whenever you kill one of the enemy knights, his buzzard craps out a green egg that quickly hatches into another enemy knight if you don't scoop it up in time.

There's also a winged pterodactyl that appears once in a while to wreak havoc.

I hadn't played Joust in over a year.

It was one of Aech's favorite games, and for a while he'd had a Joust cabinet in his chat room.

He used to challenge me to a game whenever he wanted to settle an argument or some asinine pop-culture dispute.

For a few months, we played almost every day.

In the beginning, Aech was slightly better than I was, and he had a habit of gloating over his victories.

This had really irked me, so I started practicing Joust on my own, playing a few games a night against an AI opponent.

I honed my skills until I finally got good enough to beat Aech, repeatedly and consistently.

Then I began to gloat over him, savoring my revenge.

The last time we'd played, I'd rubbed his nose in defeat so mercilessly that he'd flipped out and vowed never to play me again.

Since then, we'd used Street Fighter II to settle our disputes.

My Joust skills were a lot rustier than I thought.

I spent the first five minutes just trying to relax and to reacquaint myself with the controls and the rhythm of the game.

During this time, Acererak managed to kill me twice, mercilessly slamming his winged mount into mine at the perfect trajectory.

He handled the game's controls with the calculated perfection of a machine.

Which, of course, was exactly what he was-cutting-edge NPC artificial intelligence, programmed by Halliday himself.

By the end of our first game, the moves and tricks I'd picked up during all those marathon bouts with Aech were starting to come back to me.

But Acererak didn't need a warm-up.

He was in perfect form from the outset, and there was no way I could make up for my weak showing at the start of the game.

He killed off my last man before I even cleared 30,000 points.

Embarrassing.

"One game down, Parzival,"

he said, flashing a rictus grin.

"One more to go."

He didn't waste time by making me stand there and watch him play out the rest of his game.

He reached up and found the power switch at the rear of the game cabinet, then flipped it off and back on.

After the screen cycled through its chromatic Williams Electronics boot-up sequence, he snatched two more quarters out of thin air and dropped them into the game.

"Art thou ready?"

he inquired again, hunching over the control panel.

I hesitated a moment, then asked, "Actually, would you mind if we switched sides?

I'm used to playing on the left."

It was true.

When Aech and I played in the Basement, I always took the ostrich side.

Being on the right side during the first game had screwed up my rhythm a bit.

Acererak appeared to consider my request for a moment.

Then he nodded.

"Certainly,"

he said.

He stepped back from the cabinet and we switched sides.

It suddenly occurred to me just how absurd this scene was: a guy wearing a suit of armor, standing next to an undead king, both hunched over the controls of a classic arcade game.

It was the sort of surreal image you'd expect to see on the cover of an old issue of Heavy Metal or Dragon magazine.

Acererak slapped the Two Player button, and my eyes locked on the screen.

The next game started out badly for me too.

My opponent's movements were relentless and precise, and I spent the first few waves just trying to evade him.

I was also distracted by the incessant click of his skeletal index finger as he tapped his Flap button.

I unclenched my jaw and cleared my mind, forcing myself not to think about where I was, who I was playing against, or what was at stake.

I tried to imagine that I was back in the Basement, playing against Aech.

It worked.

I slipped into the zone, and the tide began to turn in my favor.

I began to find the flaws in the lich's playing style, the holes in his programming.

This was something I'd learned over the years, mastering hundreds of different videogames.

There was always a trick to beating a computer-controlled opponent.

At a game like this, a gifted human player could always triumph over the game's AI, because software couldn't improvise.

It could either react randomly, or in a limited number of predetermined ways, based on a finite number of preprogrammed conditions.

This was an axiom in videogames, and would be until humans invented true artificial intelligence.

Our second game came right down to the wire, but by the end of it, I'd spotted a pattern to the lich's playing technique.

By changing my ostrich's direction at a certain moment, I could get him to slam his stork into one of the oncoming buzzards.

By repeating this move, I was able to pick off his extra lives, one by one.

I died several times myself in the process, but I finally took him down during the tenth wave, with no extra lives of my own to spare.

I stepped back from the machine and sighed with relief.

I could feel rivulets of sweat running down my forehead and around the edge of my visor.

I wiped at my face with the sleeve of my shirt, and my avatar mimicked this motion.

"Good game,"

Acererak said.

Then, to my surprise, he offered me his withered claw of a hand.

I shook it, chuckling nervously as I did so.

"Yeah,"

I replied.

"Good game, man."

It occurred to me that, in a weird way, I was actually playing against Halliday.

I quickly pushed the thought out of my head, afraid I might psych myself out.

Acererak once again produced two quarters and dropped them into the Joust machine.

"This one is for all the marbles,"

he said.

"Art thou ready?"

I nodded.

This time, I took the liberty of slapping the Two Player button myself.

Our final tie-breaking game lasted longer than the first two combined.

During the final wave, so many buzzards filled the screen that it was hard to move without getting dusted by one of them.

The lich and I faced off one final time, at the very top of the playing field, both of us incessantly hitting our Flap buttons while slamming our joysticks left and right.

Acererak made a final, desperate move to avoid my charge and dropped a micrometer too low.

His final mount died in a tiny pixelated explosion.

PLAYER TWO GAME OVER appeared on the screen, and the lich let out a long bloodcurdling howl of rage.

He smashed an angry fist into the side of the Joust cabinet, shattering it into a million tiny pixels that scattered and bounced across the floor.

Then he turned to face me.

"Congratulations, Parzival,"

he said, bowing low.

"You played well."

"Thank you, noble Acererak,"

I replied, resisting the urge to jump up and down and shake my ass victoriously in his general direction.

Instead, I solemnly returned his bow.

As I did, the lich transformed into a tall human wizard dressed in flowing black robes.

I recognized him immediately.

It was Halliday's avatar, Anorak.

I stared at him, utterly speechless.

For years gunters had speculated that Anorak still roamed the OASIS, now as an autonomous NPC.

Halliday's ghost in the machine.

"Now,"

the wizard said, speaking with Halliday's familiar voice.

"Your reward."

The chamber filled with the sound of a full orchestra.

Triumphant horns were quickly joined by a stirring string section.

I recognized the music.

It was the last track from John Williams's original Star Wars score, used in the scene where Princess Leia gives Luke and Han their medals (and Chewbacca, as you may recall, gets the shaft).

As the music built to a crescendo, Anorak stretched out his right hand.

There, resting in his open palm, was the Copper Key, the item for which millions of people had been searching for the past five years.

As he handed it to me, the music faded out, and in the same instant, I heard a chime sound.

I'd just gained fifty thousand experience points, enough to raise my avatar all the way up to tenth level.

"Farewell, Sir Parzival,"

Anorak said.

"I bid you good luck on your quest."

And before I could ask what I was supposed to do next, or where I could find the first gate, his avatar vanished in a flash of light, accompanied by a teleportation sound effect I knew was lifted from the old '80s Dungeons & Dragons cartoon.

I found myself standing alone on the empty dais.

I looked down at the Copper Key in my hand and felt overcome with wonder and elation.

It looked just as it had in Anorak's Invitation: a simple antique copper key, its oval-shaped bow embossed with the roman numeral "I."

I turned it over in my avatar's hand, watching the torchlight play across the roman numeral, and that was when I spotted two small lines of text engraved into the metal.

I tilted the key up to the light and read them aloud: "What you seek lies hidden in the trash on the deepest level of Daggorath."

I didn't even need to read it a second time.

I instantly understood its meaning.

I knew exactly where I needed to go and what I would have to do once I got there.

"Hidden in the trash"

was a reference to the ancient TRS-80 line of computers made by Tandy and Radio Shack in the '70s and '80s.

Computer users of that era had given the TRS-80 the derogatory nickname of "Trash 80."

What you seek lies hidden in the trash.

Halliday's first computer had been a TRS-80, with a whopping 16K of RAM.

And I knew exactly where to find a replica of that computer in the OASIS.

Every gunter did.

In the early days of the OASIS, Halliday had created a small planet named Middletown, named after his hometown in Ohio.

The planet was the site of a meticulous re-creation of his hometown as it was in the late 1980s.

That saying about how you can never go home again?

Halliday had found a way.

Middletown was one of his pet projects, and he'd spent years coding and refining it.

And it was well known (to gunters, at least) that one of the most detailed and accurate parts of the Middletown simulation was the re-creation of Halliday's boyhood home.

I'd never been able to visit it, but I'd seen hundreds of screenshots and vidcaps of the place.

Inside Halliday's bedroom was a replica of his first computer, a TRS-80 Color Computer 2.

I was positive that was where he'd hidden the First Gate.

And the second line of text inscribed on the Copper Key told me how to reach it: On the deepest level of Daggorath.

Dagorath was a word in Sindarin, the Elvish language J.

R.

R.

Tolkien had created for The Lord of the Rings.

The word dagorath meant "battle,"

but Tolkien had spelled the word with just one "g,"

not two.

"Daggorath"

(with two "g"s) could refer only to one thing: an incredibly obscure computer game called Dungeons of Daggorath released in 1982.

The game had been made for just one platform, the TRS-80 Color Computer.

Halliday had written in Anorak's Almanac that Dungeons of Daggorath was the game that made him decide he wanted to become a videogame designer.

And Dungeons of Daggorath was one of the games sitting in the shoebox next to the TRS-80 in the re-creation of Halliday's childhood bedroom.

So all I had to do was teleport to Middletown, go to Halliday's house, sit down at his TRS-80, play the game, reach the bottom level of the dungeon, and ...

that was where I'd find the First Gate.

At least, that was my interpretation.

Middletown was in Sector Seven, a long way from Ludus.

But I'd collected more than enough gold and treasure to pay for the teleportation fare to get there.

By my avatar's previous standards, I was now filthy rich.

I checked the time: 11:03 p.m., OST (OASIS Server Time, which also happened to be Eastern Standard Time).

I had eight hours before I had to be at school.

That might be enough time.

I could go for it, right now.

Sprint like hell, back up through the dungeon to the surface, then hightail it back to the nearest transport terminal.

From there, I could teleport directly to Middletown.

If I left right now, I should be able to reach Halliday's TRS-80 in under an hour.

I knew I should get some sleep first.

I'd been logged into the OASIS for almost fifteen solid hours.

And tomorrow was Friday.

I could teleport to Middletown right after school and then I'd have the whole weekend to tackle the First Gate.

But who was I kidding?

There was no way I'd be able to sleep tonight, or sit through school tomorrow.

I had to go now.

I began to sprint for the exit, but then stopped in the middle of the chamber.

Through the open door, I saw a long shadow bouncing on the wall, accompanied by the echo of approaching footsteps.

A few seconds later, the silhouette of an avatar appeared in the doorway.

I was about to reach for my sword when I realized I was still holding the Copper Key in my hand.

I shoved it into a pouch on my belt and fumbled my sword out of its scabbard.

As I raised my blade, the avatar spoke.

"Who the hell are you?"

the silhouette demanded.

The voice sounded like it belonged to a young woman.

One who was itching for a fight.

When I failed to answer, a stocky female avatar stepped out of the shadows and into the chamber's flickering torchlight.

She had raven hair, styled Joan-of- Arc short, and appeared to be in her late teens or early twenties.

As she got closer, I realized that I knew her.

We'd never actually met, but I recognized her face from the dozens of screenshots she'd posted to her blog over the years.

It was Art3mis.

She wore a suit of scaled gunmetal-blue armor that looked more sci-fi than fantasy.

Twin blaster pistols were slung low on her hips in quickdraw holsters, and there was a long, curved elvish sword in a scabbard across her back.

She wore fingerless Road Warriorstyle racing gloves and a pair of classic Ray-Ban shades.

Overall, she seemed to be going for a sort of mid-'80s postapocalyptic cyberpunk girl-next-door look.

And it was working for me, in a big way.

In a word: hot.

As she walked toward me, the heels of her studded combat boots clicked on the stone floor.

She halted just out of my sword's reach but did not draw her own blade.

Instead, she slid her shades up onto her avatar's forehead-a blatant affectation, since sunglasses didn't actually affect a player's vision-and looked me up and down, making a show of sizing me up.

For a moment I was too star-struck to speak.

To break my paralysis, I reminded myself that the person operating the avatar in front of me might not be a woman at all.

This "girl,"

whom I'd been cyber-crushing on for the past three years, might very well be an obese, hairy-knuckled guy named Chuck.

Once I'd conjured up that sobering image, I was able to focus on my situation, and the question at hand: What was she doing here?

After five years of searching, I thought it was highly improbable that we'd both discovered the Copper Key's hiding place on the same night.

Too big of a coincidence.

"Cat got your tongue?"

she asked.

"I said: Who.

The hell.

Are you?"

Like her, I had my avatar's nametag switched off.

Clearly, I wanted to remain anonymous, especially under the circumstances.

Couldn't she take the hint?

"Greetings,"

I said, bowing slightly.

"I am Juan Snchez Villa-Lobos Ramrez."

She smirked.

"Chief metallurgist to King Charles the Fifth of Spain?"

"At your service,"

I replied, grinning.

She'd caught my obscure Highlander quote and thrown another right back at me.

It was Art3mis, all right.

"Cute."

She glanced over my shoulder, up at the empty dais, then back at me.

"So, spill it.

How did you do?"

"Do at what?"

"Jousting against Acererak?"

she said, as if it were obvious.

Suddenly, I understood.

This wasn't the first time she'd been here.

I wasn't the first gunter to decipher the Limerick and find the Tomb of Horrors.

Art3mis had beaten me to it.

And since she knew about the Joust game, she'd obviously already faced the lich herself.

But if she already had the Copper Key, there wouldn't be any reason for her to come back here.

So she clearly didn't have the key yet.

She'd faced the lich at Joust and he'd beaten her.

So she'd come back to try again.

For all I knew, this could be her eighth or ninth attempt.

And she obviously assumed the lich had beaten me, too.

"Hello?"

she said, tapping her right foot impatiently.

"I'm waiting?"

I considered making a break for it.

Just running right past her, back out through the labyrinth and up to the surface.

But if I ran, she might suspect that I had the key and decide to try to kill me to get it.

The surface of Ludus was clearly marked as a safe zone on the OASIS map, so no player-versus-player combat was allowed.

But I had no way of knowing if the same was true of this tomb, because it was underground, and it didn't even appear on the planet map.

Art3mis looked like a formidable opponent.

Body armor.

Blaster pistols.

And that elvish sword she was carrying might be vorpal.

If even half of the exploits she'd mentioned on her blog were true, her avatar was probably at least fiftieth level.

Or higher.

If PvP combat was permitted down here, she'd kick my tenth- level ass.

So I had to play this cool.

I decided to lie.

"I got creamed,"

I said.

"Joust isn't really my game."

She relaxed her posture slightly.

That seemed to be the answer she wanted to hear.

"Yeah, same here,"

she said in a commiserating tone.

"Halliday programmed old King Acererak with some pretty wicked AI, didn't he?

He's insanely hard to beat."

She glanced down at my sword, which I was still brandishing defensively.

"You can put that away.

I'm not gonna bite you."

I kept my sword raised.

"Is this tomb in a PvP zone?"

"Dunno.

You're the first avatar I've ever run into down here."

She tilted her head slightly and smiled.

"I suppose there's only one way to find out."

She drew her sword, lightning fast, and turned into a clockwise spin, bringing its glowing blade around and down at me, all in a single blur of motion.

At the last second, I managed to tilt my own blade upward to awkwardly parry the attack.

But both of our swords halted in midair, inches apart, as if held back by some invisible force.

A message flashed on my display: PLAYER-VERSUS-PLAYER COMBAT NOT PERMITTED HERE!

I breathed a sigh of relief.

(I wouldn't learn until later that the keys were nontransferable.

You couldn't drop one of them, or give them to another avatar.

And if you were killed while holding one, it vanished right along with your body.) "Well, there you have it,"

she said, grinning.

"This is a no-PvP zone after all."

She whipped her sword around in a figure-eight pattern, then smoothly replaced it in the scabbard on her back.

Very slick.

I sheathed my own sword too, but without any fancy moves.

"Halliday must not have wanted anyone to duel for the right to joust the king,"

I said.

"Yeah,"

she said, grinning.

"Lucky for you."

"Lucky for me?"

I replied, folding my arms.

"How do you figure?"

She motioned to the empty dais behind me.

"You must really be hurting for hit points right now, after fighting Acererak."

So ...

if Acererak beat you at Joust, then you had to fight him.

Good thing I won, I thought.

Or else I'd probably be creating a new avatar right about now.

"I've got hit points galore,"

I fibbed.

"That lich was a total wuss."

"Oh really?"

she said suspiciously.

"I'm fifty-second level, and he's nearly killed me every time I've had to fight him.

I have to stock up on extra healing potions every time I come down here."

She eyed me a moment, then said, "I also recognize your sword and the armor you're wearing.

You got them both right here in this dungeon, which means they're better than whatever your avatar had before.

You look like a low-level wimpazoid to me, Juan Ramrez.

And I think you're hiding something."

Now that I knew she couldn't attack me, I considered telling her the truth.

Why not just whip out the Copper Key and show it to her?

But I thought better of it.

The smart move now was to split and head straight for Middletown while I still had a head start.

She still didn't have the key and might not get it for several more days.

If I hadn't already had so many hours of Joust practice under my belt, God knows how many attempts it would have taken me to beat Acererak.

"Think what you want, She-Ra,"

I said, moving past her.

"Maybe I'll run in to you off-world sometime.

We can duke it out then."

I gave her a small wave.

"See ya 'round."

"Where do you think you're going?"

she said, following me.

"Home,"

I said, still walking.

"But what about the lich?

And the Copper Key?"

She motioned to the empty dais.

"He'll respawn in a few minutes.

When the OASIS server clock hits midnight, the whole tomb resets.

If you wait right here, you'll get another shot at beating him, without having to make your way through all of those traps again first.

That's why I've been coming here just before midnight, every other day.

So I can get in two attempts in a row, back-to-back."

Clever.

If I hadn't succeeded on my first try, I wondered how long it would have taken me to figure that out.

"I thought we could take turns playing against him,"

I said.

"I just played him, so it'll be your turn at midnight, OK?

Then I'll come back after midnight tomorrow.

We can alternate days until one of us beats him.

Sound fair?"

"I suppose,"

she said, studying me.

"But you should stick around anyway.

Something different might happen if there are two avatars here at midnight.

Anorak probably prepared for that contingency.

Maybe two instances of the lich will appear, one for each of us to play?

Or maybe-"

"I prefer to play in private,"

I said.

"Let's just take turns, OK?"

I was almost to the exit when she stepped in front of me, blocking my path.

"Come on, hold up a second,"

she said, her voice softening.

"Please?"

I could have kept walking, right through her avatar.

But I didn't.

I was desperate to get to Middletown and locate the First Gate, but I was also standing in front of the famous Art3mis, someone I'd fantasized about meeting for years.

And she was even cooler in person than I'd imagined.

I was dying to spend more time with her.

I wanted, as the '80s poet Howard Jones would say, to get to know her well.

If I left now, I might never run into her again.

"Listen,"

she said, glancing at her boots.

"I apologize for calling you a low- level wimpazoid.

That was not cool.

I insulted you."

"It's OK.

You were right, actually.

I'm only tenth level."

"Regardless, you're a fellow gunter.

And a clever one too, or you wouldn't be standing here.

So, I want you to know that I respect you, and acknowledge your skills.

And I apologize for the trash talk."

"Apology accepted.

No worries."

"Cool."

She looked relieved.

Her avatar's facial expressions were extremely realistic, which usually meant they were synched to those of their operator instead of controlled by software.

She must've been using an expensive rig.

"I was just a little freaked to find you here,"

she said.

"I mean, I knew someone else would find this place eventually.

Just not this quickly.

I've had this tomb all to myself for a while now."

"How long?"

I asked, not really expecting her to say.

She hesitated, then began to ramble.

"Three weeks!"

she said, exasperated.

"I've been coming here for three freakin' weeks, trying to beat that stupid lich at that asinine game!

And his AI is ridiculous!

I mean, you know.

I'd never even played Joust before this, and now it's driving me out of my gourd!

I swear I was this close to finally beating his ass a few days ago, but then ..."

She raked her fingers through her hair in frustration.

"Argh!

I can't sleep.

I can't eat.

My grades are going down the tubes, because I've been ditching to practice Joust-"

I was about to ask if she went to school here on Ludus, but she continued to talk, faster and faster, as if a floodgate had opened in her brain.

The words just poured out of her.

She was barely pausing to breathe.

"-and I came here tonight, thinking this would be the night I finally beat that bastard and get the Copper Key, but when I got here, I saw that someone had already uncovered the entrance.

So I realized my worst fear had finally come true.

Someone else had found the tomb.

So I ran all the way down here, totally freaking out.

I mean, I wasn't too worried, because I didn't think anyone could possibly beat Acererak on their first try, but still-"

She paused to take a deep breath and stopped abruptly.

"Sorry,"

she said a second later.

"I tend to ramble when I'm nervous.

Or excited.

And right now I'm sort of both, because I've been dying to talk to someone about all of this, but obviously I couldn't tell a soul, right?

You can't just mention in casual conversation that you-"

She cut herself off again.

"Man, I'm such a motormouth!

A jabberjaw.

A flibbertigibbet."

She mimed zipping her lips, locking them, and tossing away the imaginary key.

Without thinking, I mimed grabbing the key out of the air and unlocking her lips.

This made her laugh-an honest, genuine laugh that involved a fair amount of snorting, which made me laugh too.

She was so charming.

Her geeky demeanor and hyperkinetic speech pattern reminded me of Jordan, my favorite character in Real Genius.

I'd never felt such an instant connection with another person, in the real world or in the OASIS.

Not even with Aech.

I felt light-headed.

When she finally got her laughter under control, she said, "I really need to set up a filter to edit out that laugh of mine."

"No, you shouldn't,"

I said.

"It's a pretty great laugh, actually."

I was wincing at every word coming out of my mouth.

"I have a dorky laugh too."

Great, Wade, I thought.

You just called her laugh "dorky."

Real smooth.

But she just gave me a shy smile and mouthed the words "thank you."

I felt a sudden urge to kiss her.

Simulation or not, I didn't care.

I was working up the courage to ask for her contact card when she stuck out her hand.

"I forgot to introduce myself,"

she said.

"I'm Art3mis."

"I know,"

I said, shaking her hand.

"I'm actually a huge fan of your blog.

I've been a loyal reader for years."

"Seriously?"

Her avatar actually seemed to blush.

I nodded.

"It's an honor to meet you,"

I said.

"I'm Parzival."

I realized that I was still holding her hand and made myself let go.

"Parzival, eh?"

She tilted her head slightly.

"Named after the knight of the Round Table who found the grail, right?

Very cool."

I nodded, now even more smitten.

I almost always had to explain my name to people.

"And Artemis was the Greek goddess of the hunt, right?"

"Right!

But the normal spelling was already taken, so I had to use a leet spelling, with a number three in place of the 'e.' "

"I know,"

I said.

"You mentioned that once on your blog.

Two years ago."

I almost cited the date of the actual blog entry before I realized it would make me sound like even more of a cyber-stalking super-creep.

"You said that you still run into noobs who prounounce it 'Art-three-miss.' "

"That's right,"

she said, grinning at me.

"I did."

She stretched out a racing-gloved hand and offered me one of her contact cards.

You could design your card to look like just about anything.

Art3mis had coded hers to look like a vintage Kenner Star Wars action figure (still in the blister pack).

The figure was a crude plastic rendering of her avatar, with the same face, hair, and outfit.

Tiny versions of her guns and sword were included.

Her contact info was printed on the card, above the figure: Art3mis 52nd Level Warrior/Mage (Vehicle Sold Separately) On the back of the card were links to her blog, e-mail, and phone line.

Not only was this the first time a girl had ever given me her card, it was also, by far, the coolest contact card I had ever seen.

"This is, by far, the coolest contact card I have ever seen,"

I said.

"Thank you!"

I handed her one of my own cards, which I'd designed to look like an original Atari 2600 Adventure cartridge, with my contact info printed on the label: Parzival 10th Level Warrior (Use with Joystick Controller) "This is awesome!"

she said, looking it over.

"What a wicked design!"

"Thanks,"

I said, blushing under my visor.

I wanted to propose marriage.

I added her card to my inventory, and it appeared on my item list, right below the Copper Key.

Seeing the key listed there snapped me back to reality.

What the hell was I doing, standing here making small talk with this girl when the First Gate was waiting for me?

I checked the time.

Less than five minutes until midnight.

"Listen, Art3mis,"

I said.

"It was truly awesome to meet you.

But I gotta get going.

The server is about to reset, and I want to clear out of here before all of those traps and undead respawn."

"Oh ...

OK."

She actually sounded disappointed!

"I should probably prepare for my Joust match anyway.

But here, let me hit you with a Cure Serious Wounds spell before you go."

Before I could protest, she laid a hand on my avatar's chest and muttered a few arcane words.

My hit-point counter was already at maximum, so the spell had no effect.

But Art3mis didn't know that.

She was still under the assumption that I'd had to fight the lich.

"There you go,"

she said, stepping back.

"Thanks,"

I said.

"But you shouldn't have.

We're competitors, you know."

"I know.

But we can still be friends, right?"

"I hope so."

"Besides, the Third Gate is still a long way off.

I mean, it took five years for the two of us to get this far.

And if I know Halliday's game-design strategy, things are just going to get harder from here on out."

She lowered her voice.

"Listen, are you sure you don't want to stick around?

I bet we can both play at once.

We can give each other Jousting tips.

I've started to spot some flaws in the king's technique-"

Now I was starting to feel like a jerk for lying to her.

"That's a really kind offer.

But I have to go."

I searched for a plausible excuse.

"I've got school in the morning."

She nodded, but her expression shifted back to one of suspicion.

Then her eyes widened, as though an idea had just occurred to her.

Her pupils began to dart around, focused on the space in front of her, and I realized she was looking something up in a browser window.

A few seconds later, her face contorted in anger.

"You lying bastard!"

she shouted.

"You dishonest sack of crap!"

She made her Web browser window visible to me and spun it around.

It displayed the Scoreboard on Halliday's website.

In all the excitement, I'd forgotten to check it.

It looked just as it had for the past five years, with one change.

My avatar's name now appeared at the very top of the list, in first place, with a score of 10,000 points beside it.

The other nine slots still contained Halliday's initials, JDH, followed by zeros.

"Holy shit,"

I muttered.

When Anorak had handed me the Copper Key, I'd become the first gunter in history to score points in the contest.

And, I realized, since the Scoreboard was viewable to the entire world, my avatar had just become famous.

I checked the newsfeed headlines just to be sure.

Every single one of them contained my avatar's name.

Stuff like: MYSTERIOUS AVATAR "PARZIVAL"

MAKES HISTORY and PARZIVAL FINDS COPPER KEY.

I stood there in a daze, forcing myself to breathe.

Then Art3mis gave me a shove, which, of course, I didn't feel.

She did knock my avatar backward a few feet, though.

"You beat him on your first try?"

she shouted.

I nodded.

"He won the first game, but I won the last two.

Just barely, though."

"Shiiiiiit!"

she screamed, clenching her fists.

"How in the hell did you beat him on your first try?"

I got the distinct impression she wanted to sock me in the face.

"It was pure luck,"

I said.

"I used to play Joust all the time against a friend of mine.

So I'd already had a ton of preparation.

I'm sure if you'd had as much practice-"

"Please!"

she growled, holding up a hand.

"Do not patronize me, OK?"

She let out what I can only describe as a howl of frustration.

"I don't believe this!

Do you realize I've been trying to beat him for five goddamn weeks!"

"But a minute ago you said it was three weeks-"

"Don't interrupt me!"

She gave me another shove.

"I've been practicing Joust nonstop for over a month now!

I'm seeing flying ostriches in my goddamn sleep!"

"That can't be pleasant."

"And you just walk in here and nail it on the first try!"

She started pounding her fist into the center of her forehead, and I realized she was pissed at herself, not me.

"Listen,"

I said.

"It really was luck.

I've got a knack for classic arcade games.

That's my specialty."

I shrugged.

"Stop hitting yourself like Rain Man, OK?"

She stopped and stared me.

After a few seconds, she let out a long sigh.

"Why couldn't it be Centipede?

Or Ms.

Pac-Man?

Or BurgerTime?

Then I'd probably have already cleared the First Gate by now!"

"Well, I don't know about that,"

I said.

She glared at me a second, then gave me a devilish smile.

She turned to face the exit and began to execute a series of elaborate gestures in the air in front of her while whispering the words of some incantation.

"Hey,"

I said.

"Hold on a sec.

What are you doing?"

But I already knew.

As she finished casting her spell, a giant stone wall appeared, completely covering the chamber's only exit.

Shit!

She'd cast a Barrier spell.

I was trapped inside the room.

"Oh, come on!"

I shouted.

"Why did you do that?"

"You seemed to be in an awful big hurry to get out of here.

My guess is that when Anorak gave you the Copper Key, he also gave you some sort of clue about the location of the First Gate.

Right?

That's where you're headed next, isn't it?"

"Yeah,"

I said.

I thought about denying it, but what was the point now?

"So unless you can nullify my spell-and I'm betting you can't, Mr.

Tenth- Level Warrior-that barrier will keep you in here until just after midnight, when the server resets.

All of those traps you disarmed on your way down here will reset.

That should slow down your exit considerably."

"Yes,"

I said.

"It will."

"And while you're busy making your way back up to the surface, I'll have another shot at defeating Acererak.

And this time I'm gonna destroy him.

Then I'll be right behind you, mister."

I folded my arms.

"If the king has been beating your ass for the past five weeks, what makes you think you're finally going to win tonight?"

"Competition brings out the best in me,"

she replied.

"It always has.

And now I've got some serious competition."

I glanced over at the magical barrier she'd created.

She was over fiftieth level, so it would remain in existence for the spell's maximum duration: fifteen minutes.

All I could do was stand there and wait for it to dissipate.

"You're evil, you know that?"

I said.

She grinned and shook her head.

"Chaotic Neutral, sugar."

I grinned back at her.

"I'm still going to beat you to the First Gate, you know."

"Probably,"

she said.

"But this is just the beginning.

You'll still have to clear it.

And there are still two more keys to find, and two more gates to clear.

Plenty of time for me to catch up with you, and then leave you in the dust, ace."

"We'll see about that, lady."

She motioned to the window displaying the Scoreboard.

"You're famous now,"

she said.

"You realize what that means, don't you?"

"I haven't had much time to think about it yet."

"Well, I have.

I've been thinking about it for the past five weeks.

Your avatar's name on that Scoreboard is going to change everything.

The public will become obsessed with the contest again, just like when it first began.

The media is already going berserk.

By tomorrow, Parzival will be a household name."

That thought made me a little queasy.

"You could become famous in the real world too,"

she said.

"If you reveal your true identity to the media."

"I'm not an idiot."

"Good.

Because there are billions of dollars up for grabs, and now everyone is going to assume you know how and where to find the egg.

There are a lot of people who would kill for that information."

"I know that,"

I said.

"And I appreciate your concern.

But I'll be fine."

But I didn't feel fine.

I hadn't really considered any of this, maybe because I'd never really believed I would actually be in this position.

We stood there in silence, watching the clock and waiting.

"What would you do if you won?"

she suddenly asked.

"How would you spend all that money?"

I had spent a lot of time thinking about that.

I daydreamed about it all the time.

Aech and I had made absurd lists of things we would do and buy if we won the prize.

"I don't know,"

I said.

"The usual, I guess.

Move into a mansion.

Buy a bunch of cool shit.

Not be poor."

"Wow.

Big dreamer,"

she said.

"And after you buy your mansion and your 'cool shit,' what will you do with the hundred and thirty billion you'll have left over?"

Not wanting her to think I was some shallow idiot, I impulsively blurted out what I'd always dreamed of doing if I won.

It was something I'd never told anyone.

"I'd have a nuclear-powered interstellar spacecraft constructed in Earth's orbit,"

I said.

"I'd stock it with a lifetime supply of food and water, a self- sustaining biosphere, and a supercomputer loaded with every movie, book, song, videogame, and piece of artwork that human civilization has ever created, along with a stand-alone copy of the OASIS.

Then I'd invite a few of my closest friends to come aboard, along with a team of doctors and scientists, and we'd all get the hell out of Dodge.

Leave the solar system and start looking for an extrasolar Earthlike planet."

I hadn't thought this plan all the way through yet, of course.

I still had a lot of details to work out.

She raised an eyebrow.

"That's pretty ambitious,"

she said.

"But you do realize that nearly half the people on this planet are starving, right?"

I detected no malice in her voice.

She sounded like she genuinely believed I might not be aware of this fact.

"Yes, I know,"

I said defensively.

"The reason so many people are starving is because we've wrecked the planet.

The Earth is dying, you know?

It's time to leave."

"That's a pretty negative outlook,"

she said.

"If I win that dough, I'm going to make sure everyone on this planet has enough to eat.

Once we tackle world hunger, then we can figure out how to fix the environment and solve the energy crisis."

I rolled my eyes.

"Right,"

I said.

"And after you pull off that miracle, you can genetically engineer a bunch of Smurfs and unicorns to frolic around this new perfect world you've created."

"I'm being serious,"

she said.

"You really think it's that simple?"

I said.

"That you can just write a check for two hundred and forty billion dollars and fix all the world's problems?"

"I don't know.

Maybe not.

But I'm gonna give it a shot."

"If you win."

"Right.

If I win."

Just then, the OASIS server clock struck midnight.

We both knew the second it happened, because the throne reappeared atop the dais, along with Acererak.

He sat there motionless, looking just like he did when I'd first entered the room.

Art3mis glanced up at him, then back at me.

She smiled and gave me a small wave.

"I'll see you around, Parzival."

"Yeah,"

I replied.

"See ya."

She turned and began to walk toward the dais.

I called after her.

"Hey, Art3mis?"

She turned back.

For some reason I felt compelled to help her, even though I knew I shouldn't.

"Try playing on the left side,"

I said.

"That's how I won.

I think he might be easier to beat if he's playing the stork."

She stared at me for a second, possibly trying to gauge whether I was messing with her.

Then she nodded and ascended the dais.

Acererak came to life as soon as she set foot on the first step.

"Greetings, Art3mis,"

his voice boomed.

"What is it that you seek?"

I couldn't hear her reply, but a few seconds later the throne transformed into the Joust game, just as it had earlier.

Art3mis said something to the lich and the two of them switched sides, so that she was on the left.

Then they began to play.

I watched them play from a distance until a few minutes later, when her Barrier spell dissipated.

I cast one last glance up at Art3mis, then threw open the door and ran out.

It took me a little over an hour to make my way back through the tomb and up to the surface.

The instant I crawled outside, a MESSAGES WAITING indicator began to flash on my display.

I realized then that Halliday had placed the tomb inside a null-communication zone, so no one could receive calls, texts, or e-mail while they were inside.

Probably to prevent gunters from calling for help or advice.

I checked my messages and saw that Aech had been trying to reach me since the moment my name appeared on the Scoreboard.

He'd called over a dozen times and had also sent several text messages asking me what in the sweet name of Christ was going on and screaming at me in ALL CAPS to call him back right now.

Just as I'd finished deleting these messages, I received another incoming call.

It was Aech trying once again to reach me.

I decided not to pick up.

Instead, I sent him a short text message, promising to call as soon as I could.

As I ran out of the forest, I kept the Scoreboard up in the corner of my display so I'd know immediately if Art3mis won her Joust match and obtained the key.

When I finally reached the transport terminal and jumped into the nearest booth, it was just after two o'clock in the morning.

I entered my destination on the booth's touchscreen, and a map of Middletown appeared on the display.

I was prompted to select one of the planet's 256 transport terminals as my arrival point.

When Halliday had created Middletown, he hadn't placed just a single re- creation of his hometown there.

He'd made 256 identical copies of it, spread out evenly across the planet's surface.

I didn't think it would matter which copy of his hometown I went to, so I selected one at random, near the equator.

Then I tapped CONFIRM to pay the fare, and my avatar vanished.

A millisecond later, I was standing inside a vintage 1980s phone booth located inside an old Greyhound bus station.

I opened the door and stepped out.

It was like stepping out of a time machine.

Several NPCs milled around, all dressed in mid-1980s attire.

A woman with a giant ozone-depleting hairdo bobbed her head to an oversize Walkman.

A kid in a gray Members Only jacket leaned against the wall, working on a Rubik's Cube.

A Mohawked punk rocker sat in a plastic chair, watching a Riptide rerun on a coin-operated television.

I located the exit and headed for it, drawing my sword as I went.

The entire surface of Middletown was a PvP zone, so I had to proceed with caution.

Shortly after the Hunt began, this planet had turned into Grand Central Station, and all 256 copies of Halliday's hometown had been scoured and ransacked by an endless parade of gunters, all searching for keys and clues.

The popular theory on the message boards was that Halliday had created multiple copies of his hometown so that several avatars could search it at the same time without fighting over a single location.

Of course, all of this searching had yielded a big fat doughnut.

No keys.

No clues.

No egg.

Since then, interest in the planet had waned dramatically.

But some gunters probably still came here on occasion.

If there was already another gunter inside Halliday's house when I got there, my plan was to make a run for it, then steal a car and drive twenty-five miles (in any direction) to the next identical copy of Middletown.

And then the next, until I found an instance of Halliday's house that was unoccupied.

Outside the bus station, it was a beautiful Midwestern day.

The reddish orange sun hovered low in the sky.

Even though I'd never been to Middletown before, I'd done extensive research on it, so I knew Halliday had coded the planet so that no matter when you visited or where you were on the surface, it was always a perfect late-autumn afternoon, circa 1986.

I pulled up a map of the town and traced a route from my current location to Halliday's childhood home.

It was about a mile to the north.

I pointed my avatar in that direction and began to run.

Looking around, I was astounded at the painstaking attention to detail.

I'd read that Halliday had done all of the coding himself, drawing on his memories to re-create his hometown exactly as it was during his childhood.

He'd used old street maps, phone books, photographs, and video footage for reference, to make everything as authentic and accurate as possible.

The place reminded me a lot of the town in the movie Footloose.

Small, rural, and sparsely populated.

The houses all seemed incredibly big and were placed ridiculously far apart.

It astounded me that fifty years ago, even lower-income families had an entire house to themselves.

The NPC citizens all looked like extras from a John Cougar Mellencamp video.

I saw people out raking leaves, walking dogs, and sitting on porches.

Out of curiosity, I waved at a few of them and got a friendly wave in return every time.

Clues as to the time period were everywhere.

NPC-piloted cars and trucks cruised slowly up and down the shady streets, all of them gas-guzzling antiques: Trans-Ams, Dodge Omnis, IROC Z28s, and K-cars.

I passed a service station, and the sign said gasoline was only ninety-three cents a gallon.

I was about to turn down Halliday's street when I heard a fanfare of trumpets.

My eyes shot over to the Scoreboard window, still hovering in the corner of my display.

Art3mis had done it.

Her name now appeared directly below mine.

Her score was 9,000 points-a thousand points less than mine.

It appeared that I'd received a bonus for being the first avatar to obtain the Copper Key.

The full ramifications of the Scoreboard's existence occurred to me for the first time.

From here on out, it would not only allow gunters to keep track of each other's progress, it would also show the entire world who the current frontrunners were, creating instant celebrities (and targets) in the process.

I knew, at that exact moment, Art3mis must be staring down at her own copy of the Copper Key, reading the clue engraved on its surface.

I was sure she'd be able to decipher it just as quickly as I had.

In fact, she was probably already on her way to Middletown right now.

That got me moving again.

I now had only an hour's head start on her.

Maybe less.

When I reached Cleveland Avenue, the street on which Halliday had grown up, I sprinted down the cracked sidewalk to the front steps of his childhood home.

It looked just like the photographs I'd seen: a modest two-story colonial with red vinyl siding.

Two late-'70s Ford sedans were parked in the driveway, one of them up on cinder blocks.

Looking at the replica Halliday had created of his old house, I tried to imagine what it had been like for him to grow up there.

I'd read that in the real Middletown, Ohio, every house on this street had been demolished in the late '90s to make room for a strip mall.

But Halliday had preserved his childhood forever, here in the OASIS.

I ran up the walkway and entered through the front door, which opened into the living room.

I knew this room well, because it appeared in Anorak's Invitation.

I recognized the simulated wood-grain paneling, the burnt orange carpet, and garish furniture that looked like it had been scavenged from several disco-era yard sales.

The house was empty.

For whatever reason, Halliday had decided not to place NPC re-creations of himself or his deceased parents here.

Perhaps that would have been too creepy, even for him.

However, I did spot a familiar family photo on the living room wall.

This portrait had been taken at the local Kmart in 1984, but Mr.

and Mrs.

Halliday were still dressed in late-'70s fashions.

Twelve-year- old Jimmy stood between them, glowering at the camera from behind thick eyeglasses.

The Hallidays looked like an ordinary American family.

There was no hint that the stoic man in the brown leisure suit was an abusive alcoholic, that the smiling woman in the floral pantsuit was bipolar, or that the young boy in the faded Asteroids T-shirt would one day create an entirely new universe.

Looking around, I wondered why Halliday, who always claimed to have had a miserable childhood, had later become so nostalgic for it.

I knew that if and when I finally escaped from the stacks, I'd never look back.

And I definitely wouldn't create a detailed simulation of the place.

I glanced over at the bulky Zenith television and the Atari 2600 connected to it.

The simulated wood grain on the Atari's plastic casing perfectly matched the simulated wood grain on the television cabinet and on the living room walls.

Beside the Atari was a shoebox containing nine game cartridges: Combat, Space Invaders, Pitfall, Kaboom!, Star Raiders, The Empire Strikes Back, Starmaster, Yars' Revenge, and E.T.

Gunters had attached a large amount of significance to the absence of Adventure, the game Halliday was seen playing on this very same Atari at the end of Anorak's Invitation.

People had searched the entire Middletown simulation for a copy of it, but there didn't appear to be one anywhere on the whole planet.

Gunters had brought copies of Adventure here from other planets, but when they tried to play them on Halliday's Atari, they never worked.

So far, no one had been able to figure out why.

I did a quick search of the rest of the house and made sure no other avatars were present.

Then I opened the door of James Halliday's room.

It was empty, so I stepped inside and locked the door.

Screenshots and simcaps of this room had been available for years, and I'd studied all of them closely.

But this was my first time standing inside the "real thing."

I got chills.

The carpet was a horrendous mustard color.

So was the wallpaper.

But the walls were almost entirely covered with movie and rock band posters: Real Genius, WarGames, Tron, Pink Floyd, Devo, Rush.

A bookshelf stood just inside the door, overflowing with science-fiction and fantasy paperbacks (all titles I'd read, of course).

A second bookshelf by the bed was crammed to capacity with old computer magazines and Dungeons & Dragons rule books.

Several long boxes of comic books were stacked against the wall, each carefully labeled.

And there on the battered wooden desk in the corner was James Halliday's first computer.

Like many home computers of its era, it was housed in the same case as its keyboard.

TRS-80 COLOR COMPUTER 2, 16K RAM was printed on a label above the keys.

Cables snaked out of the back of the machine, leading to an audiocassette recorder, a small color television, a dot-matrix printer, and a 300-baud modem.

A long list of telephone numbers for dial-up bulletin board systems was taped to the desk beside the modem.

I sat down and located the power switch for the computer and the TV.

I heard a crackle of static, followed by a low hum, as the TV warmed up.

A moment later, the TRS-80's green start-up screen appeared, and I saw these words: EXTENDED COLOR BASIC 1.1 OK Below this was a flashing cursor, cycling through every color of the spectrum.

I typed HELLO and hit the Enter key.

?SYNTAX ERROR appeared on the next line.

"Hello"

wasn't a valid command in BASIC, the only language the ancient computer understood.

I knew from my research that the cassette recorder functioned as the TRS-80's "tape drive."

It stored data as analog sound on magnetic audiotapes.

When Halliday had first started programming, the poor kid hadn't even had access to a floppy disk drive.

He'd had to store his code on cassette tapes.

A shoebox sat beside the tape drive, filled with dozens of these cassettes.

Most of them were text adventure games: Raaka-tu, Bedlam, Pyramid, and Madness and the Minotaur.

There were also a few ROM cartridges, which fit into a slot on the side of the computer.

I dug around in the box until I found a cartridge with The game's artwork depicted a first-person view of a long dungeon corridor blocked by a hulking blue giant with a large stone ax.

When a list of the games found in Halliday's bedroom had first appeared online, I'd made sure to download and master every single one of them, so I'd already solved Dungeons of Daggorath, about two years earlier.

It had taken most of a weekend.

The graphics were crude, but even so, the game was fun and incredibly addictive.

I knew from reading the message boards that during the past five years, several gunters had played and solved Dungeons of Daggorath right here on Halliday's TRS-80.

Some had solved every single game in the shoebox, just to see if anything would happen.

And nothing had.

But none of those gunters had been in possession of the Copper Key.

My hands were trembling slightly as I powered off the TRS-80 and inserted the Dungeons of Daggorath cartridge.

When I turned the computer back on, the screen flashed to black and a crude graphic of a wizard appeared, accompanied by some ominous sound effects.

The wizard held a staff in one hand, and below DUNGEONS OF DAGGORATH!

I laid my fingers on the keyboard and began to play.

As soon as I did, a jambox sitting on top of Halliday's dresser turned itself on, and familiar music began to blast out of it.

It was Basil Poledouris's score for Conan the Barbarian.

That must be Anorak's way of letting me know I'm on the right track, I thought.

I quickly lost track of time.

I forgot that my avatar was sitting in Halliday's bedroom and that, in reality, I was sitting in my hideout, huddled near the electric heater, tapping at the empty air in front of me, entering commands on an imaginary keyboard.

All of the intervening layers slipped away, and I lost myself in the game within the game.

In Dungeons of Daggorath, you control your avatar by typing in commands, like TURN LEFT or GET TORCH, navigating your way through a maze of vector- graphic corridors while fighting off spiders, stone giants, blobs, and wraiths as you descend deeper and deeper, working your way down through the dungeon's five increasingly difficult levels.

It took a while for the commands and quirks of the game to come back to me, but once they did, the game wasn't that difficult to solve.

The ability to save my place at any time basically gave me infinite lives.

(Although saving and reloading games from the tape drive proved to be a slow and tedious process.

It often took several attempts and a lot of fiddling with the cassette deck's volume knob.) Saving my game also allowed me to log out for bathroom breaks, and to recharge my space heater.

While I was playing, the Conan the Barbarian score ended and the jambox clicked over and began to play the opposite side of the tape, treating me to the synthesizer-laden score for Ladyhawke.

I couldn't wait to rub Aech's nose in that.

I reached the last level of the dungeon around four o'clock in the morning and faced off against the Evil Wizard of Daggorath.

After dying and reloading twice, I finally defeated him, using an Elvish Sword and a Ring of Ice.

I completed the game by picking up the wizard's magic ring, claiming it for myself.

As I did, an image appeared on the screen, showing a wizard with a bright star on his staff and his robes.

The text below read: BEHOLD!

DESTINY AWAITS THE HAND OF A NEW WIZARD!

I waited to see what would happen.

For a moment, nothing did.

Then Halliday's ancient dot-matrix printer came to life and noisily ground out a single line of text.

The tractor feed spooled the page out of the top of the printer.

I tore the sheet off and read what was there: CONGRATULATIONS!

YOU HAVE OPENED THE FIRST GATE!

I glanced around and saw that there was now a wrought-iron gate embedded in the bedroom wall, in the exact spot where the WarGames poster had been a second before.

In the center of the gate was a copper-plated lock with a keyhole.

I climbed up on top of Halliday's desk so I could reach the lock, then slid the Copper Key into the keyhole and turned it.

The entire gate began to glow, as if the metal had become superheated, and its double doors swung inward, revealing a field of stars.

It appeared to be a portal into deep space.

"My God, it's full of stars,"

I heard a disembodied voice say.

I recognized it as a sound bite from the film 2010.

Then I heard a low, ominous hum, followed by a piece of music from that film's score: "Also Sprach Zarathustra"

by Richard Strauss.

I leaned forward and looked through the portal.

Left and right, up and down.

Nothing but an endless field of stars in all directions.

Squinting, I could also make out a few tiny nebulae and galaxies in the distance.

I didn't hesitate.

I jumped into the open gate.

It seemed to pull me in, and I began to fall.

But I fell forward instead of down, and the stars seemed to fall with me.

I found myself standing in an old video arcade, playing Galaga.

The game was already in progress.

I had double ships and a score of 41,780 points.

I glanced down and saw that my hands were on the controls.

After a second or two of disorientation, I reflexively began to play, moving the joystick left just in time to avoid losing one of my ships.

Keeping one eye on the game, I tried to make sense of my surroundings.

In my peripheral vision I was able to make out a Dig Dug game on my left and a Zaxxon machine to my right.

Behind me, I could hear a cacophony of digital combat coming from dozens of other vintage arcade games.

Then, as I finished clearing the wave on Galaga, I noticed my reflection in the game's screen.

It wasn't my avatar's face I saw there.

It was Matthew Broderick's face.

A young preFerris Bueller and pre-Ladyhawke Matthew Broderick.

Then I knew where I was.

And who I was.

I was David Lightman, Matthew Broderick's character in the movie WarGames.

And this was his first scene in the film.

I was in the movie.

I took a quick glance around and saw a detailed replica of 20 Grand Palace, the combination arcade/pizza joint featured in the film.

Kids with feathered '80s hairstyles were clustered around each of the games.

Others sat in booths, eating pizza and drinking sodas.

"Video Fever"

by the Beepers blasted out of a jukebox in the corner.

Everything looked and sounded exactly as it did in the movie.

Halliday had copied every last detail from the film and re-created it as an interactive simulation.

Holy shit.

I'd spent years wondering what challenges awaited me inside the First Gate.

Never once had I imagined this.

But I probably should have.

WarGames had been one of Halliday's all-time favorite movies.

Which was why I had watched it over three dozen times.

Well, that, and also because it was completely awesome, with an old-school teenage computer hacker as the protagonist.

And it looked like all of that research was about to pay off.

Now I heard a repetitive electronic beeping.

It seemed to be coming from the right pocket of the jeans I was wearing.

Keeping my left hand on the joystick, I reached in my pocket and pulled out a digital watch.

The readout said 7:45 a.m.

When I pushed one of the buttons to silence the alarm, a warning flashed in the center of my display: DAVID, YOU'RE GOING TO BE LATE FOR SCHOOL!

I used a voice command to pull up my OASIS map, hoping to learn where the gate had transported me.

But it turned out that not only was I no longer on Middletown, I was no longer in the OASIS at all.

My locator icon was in the middle of a blank screen, which meant I was OTM-off the map.

When I'd stepped into the gate, it had transported my avatar into a stand-alone simulation, a virtual location separate from the OASIS.

It seemed that the only way I could get back would be to clear the gate by completing the quest.

But if this was a videogame, how was I supposed to play it?

If this was a quest, what was my goal?

I continued to play Galaga while pondering these questions.

A second later, a young boy walked into the arcade and came over to me.

"Hi, David!"

he said, his eyes on my game.

I recognized this kid from the movie.

His name was Howie.

In the film, Matthew Broderick's character hands his Galaga game off to Howie when he rushes off to school.

"Hi, David!"

the boy repeated, in the same exact tone.

As he spoke this time, his words also appeared as text, superimposed across the bottom of my display, like subtitles.

Below this, flashing red, were the words FINAL DIALOGUE WARNING!

I began to understand.

The simulation was warning me that this was my final chance to deliver the next line of dialogue from the movie.

If I didn't say the line, I could guess what would probably happen next.

GAME OVER.

But I didn't panic, because I knew the next line.

I'd seen WarGames so many times that I knew the entire film by heart.

"Hi, Howie!"

I said.

But the voice I heard in my earphones was not my own.

It was Matthew Broderick's voice.

And as I spoke the line, the warning on my display vanished and a score of 100 points appeared, superimposed at the top of my display.

I racked my brain, trying to mentally replay the rest of the scene.

The next line came to me.

"How's it going?"

I said, and my score jumped to 200 points.

"Pretty good,"

Howie replied.

I started to feel giddy.

This was incredible.

I was totally inside the movie.

Halliday had transformed a fifty-year-old film into a real-time interactive videogame.

I wondered how long it had taken him to program this thing.

Another warning flashed on my display: YOU'RE GOING TO BE LATE FOR SCHOOL, DAVID!

HURRY!

I stepped away from the Galaga machine.

"Hey, you wanna take this over?"

I asked Howie.

"Sure,"

he replied, grabbing the controls.

"Thanks!"

A green path appeared on the floor of the arcade, leading from where I stood to the exit.

I started to follow it, then remembered to run back and grab my notebook off of the Dig Dug game, just like David had in the movie.

As I did this, my score jumped another 100 points, and ACTION BONUS!

appeared on my display.

"Bye, David!"

Howie shouted.

"Bye!"

I shouted back.

Another 100 points.

This was easy!

I followed the green path out of 20 Grand Palace and up the busy street a few blocks.

I was now running along a tree-lined suburban street.

I rounded a corner and saw that the path led directly to a large brick building.

The sign over the door said Snohomish High School-David's school, and the setting of the next few scenes in the movie.

My mind was racing as I ran inside.

If all I had to do was rattle off lines of dialogue from WarGames on cue for the next two hours, this was going to be a breeze.

Without even knowing it, I'd totally overprepared.

I probably knew WarGames even better than I knew Real Genius and Better Off Dead.

As I ran down the empty school hallway, another warning flashed in front of me: YOU'RE LATE FOR YOUR BIOLOGY CLASS!

I continued to sprint at top speed, following the green path, which was now pulsing brightly.

It eventually led me to the door of a classroom on the second floor.

Through the window, I could see that class was already in session.

The teacher was up at the board.

I saw my seat-the only empty one in the room.

It was right behind Ally Sheedy.

I opened the door and tiptoed inside, but the teacher spotted me right away.

"Ah, David!

Nice of you to join us!"

Making it all the way to the end of the movie wound up being a lot harder than I anticipated.

It only took me about fifteen minutes to figure out the "rules"

of the game and to sort out how the scoring system worked.

I was actually required to do a lot more than simply recite dialogue.

I also had to perform all the actions that Broderick's character performed in the film, in the correct way and at the correct moment.

It was like being forced to act the leading role in a play you'd watched many times but had never actually rehearsed.

For most of the movie's first hour, I was on edge, constantly trying to think ahead to have my next line of dialogue ready.

Whenever I flubbed a line or didn't perform an action at the right moment, my score decreased and a warning flashed on my display.

When I made two mistakes in a row, a FINAL WARNING message appeared.

I wasn't sure what would happen if I got three strikes in a row, but my guess was that I'd either be expelled from the gate or that my avatar would simply be killed.

I wasn't eager to find out which it would be.

Whenever I correctly performed seven actions or recited seven lines of dialogue in a row, the game would award me a "Cue Card Power-Up."

The next time I blanked on what to do or say, I could select the Cue Card icon and the correct action or line of dialogue would appear on my display, sort of like a teleprompter.

During scenes that didn't involve my character, the simulation cut to a passive third-person perspective, and all I had to do was sit back and watch things play out, sort of like watching a cut scene in an old videogame.

During these scenes, I could relax until my character came on-screen again.

During one of these breaks, I tried to access a copy of the movie from my OASIS console's hard drive, with the intention of playing it in a window on my display so I could refer to it.

But the system wouldn't let me.

In fact, I found that I couldn't open any windows at all while inside the gate.

When I tried, I got a warning: NO CHEATING.

TRY TO CHEAT AGAIN AND IT'S GAME OVER!

Luckily, it turned out that I didn't need any help.

Once I'd collected the maximum of five Cue Card Power-Ups I began to relax, and the game actually started to be fun.

It wasn't hard to enjoy being inside one of my favorite flicks.

After a while, I even discovered that I could earn bonus points by delivering a line in the exact tone and with the same inflection as in the film.

I didn't know it at the time, but I'd just become the first person to play an entirely new type of videogame.

When GSS got wind of the WarGames simulation inside the First Gate (and they did a short time later), the company quickly patented the idea and began to buy up the rights to old movies and TV shows and convert them into immersive interactive games that they dubbed Flicksyncs.

Flicksyncs became wildly popular.

There turned out to be a huge market for games that allowed people to play a leading role in one of their favorite old movies or TV series.

By the time I reached the final scenes of the movie, I was starting to get twitchy from exhaustion.

I'd now been up for over twenty-four hours straight, jacked in the entire time.

The last action I had to perform was instructing the WOPR supercomputer to "play itself"

at tic-tac-toe.

Since every game the WOPR played ended in a tie, this had the improbable effect of teaching the artificially intelligent computer that global thermonuclear war, too, was a game in which "the only winning move is not to play."

This prevented the WOPR from launching all of the United States' ICBMs at the Soviet Union.

I, David Lightman, a teenage computer geek from suburban Seattle, had single-handedly prevented the end of human civilization.

The NORAD command center erupted in celebration, and I waited for the movie's end credits to roll.

But they didn't.

Instead, all the characters around me vanished, leaving me alone in the giant war room.

When I checked my avatar's reflection in a computer monitor, I saw that I no longer looked like Matthew Broderick.

I'd changed back into Parzival.

I glanced around the empty NORAD command center, wondering what I was supposed to do next.

Then all of the giant video display screens in front of me went blank, and four lines of glowing green text appeared on them.

It was another riddle: The captain conceals the Jade Key in a dwelling long neglected But you can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected I stood there for a second, staring at the words in stunned silence.

Then I snapped out of my daze and quickly took several screenshots of the text.

As I was doing this, the Copper Gate reappeared, embedded in a nearby wall.

The gate was open, and through it I could see Halliday's bedroom.

It was the exit.

The way out.

I'd done it.

I'd cleared the First Gate.

I glanced back up at the riddle on the viewscreens.

It had taken me years to decipher the Limerick and locate the Copper Key.

At first glance, this new riddle about the Jade Key looked like it might take just as long to figure out.

I didn't understand a word of it.

But I was also dead on my feet, and in no condition for further puzzle-solving.

I could barely keep my eyes open.

I jumped through the exit and landed with a thud on the floor of Halliday's bedroom.

When I turned around and looked at the wall, I saw that the gate was now gone and the WarGames poster had reappeared in its place.

I checked my avatar's stats and saw that I'd been awarded several hundred thousand experience points for clearing the gate, enough to raise my avatar from tenth level up to twentieth in one shot.

Then I checked the Scoreboard: HIGH SCORES: 1.

Parzival 110000 2.

Art3mis 3.

JDH 4.

JDH 5.

JDH 6.

JDH 7.

JDH 8.

JDH 9.

JDH 10.

JDH My score had increased by 100,000 points, and a copper-colored gate icon now appeared beside it.

The media (and everyone else) had probably been monitoring the Scoreboard since last night, so now the whole world would know that I'd cleared the First Gate.

I was too exhausted to consider the implications.

All I could think about was sleep.

I ran downstairs and into the kitchen.

The keys to the Halliday family car were on a pegboard next to the refrigerator.

I grabbed them and rushed outside.

The car (the one that wasn't up on blocks) was a 1982 Ford Thunderbird.

The engine started on the second try.

I backed out of the driveway and drove to the bus station.

From there, I teleported back to the transport terminal next to my school on Ludus.

Then I went to my locker and dumped all of my avatar's newfound treasure, armor, and weapons inside before finally logging out of the OASIS.

When I pulled off my visor, it was 6:17 a.m.

I rubbed my bloodshot eyes and gazed around the dark interior of my hideout, trying to wrap my head around everything that had just happened.

I suddenly realized how cold it was in the van.

I'd been using the tiny space heater off and on all night and had drained the batteries.

I was way too tired to get on the exercise bike and recharge them.

And I didn't have the energy to make the trek back to my aunt's trailer, either.

But the sun would be up soon, so I knew I could crash there in my hideout without worrying that I would freeze to death.

I slid off of my chair and onto the floor, then curled up in my sleeping bag.

As I closed my eyes, I began to ponder the riddle of the Jade Key.

But sleep swallowed me whole a few seconds later.

I had a dream.

I was standing alone in the center of a scorched battlefield, with several different armies arrayed against me.

An army of Sixers stood in front of me, and several different gunter clans surrounded me on all other flanks, brandishing swords and guns and weapons of powerful magic.

I looked down at my body.

It wasn't Parzival's body; it was my own.

And I was wearing armor made of paper.

In my right hand was a toy plastic sword, and in my left was a large glass egg.

It looked exactly like the glass egg that causes Tom Cruise's character so much grief in Risky Business, but somehow I knew that, in the context of my dream, it was supposed to be Halliday's Easter egg.

And I was standing there, out in the open, holding it for all the world to see.

In unison, the armies of my enemies let out a fierce battle cry and charged toward me.

They converged on my position with bared teeth and blood in their eyes.

They were coming to take the egg, and there was nothing I could do to stop them.

I knew I was dreaming, and so I expected to wake up before they reached me.

But I didn't.

The dream continued as the egg was ripped from my grasp, and I felt myself being torn to shreds.

I slept for over twelve hours and missed school entirely.

When I finally woke up, I rubbed my eyes and lay there in silence awhile, trying to convince myself that the events of the previous day had actually occurred.

It all seemed like a dream to me now.

Far too good to be real.

Eventually, I grabbed my visor and got online to find out for sure.

Every single newsfeed seemed to be showing a screenshot of the Scoreboard.

And my avatar's name was there at the top, in first place.

Art3mis was still in second place, but the score beside her name had now increased to 109,000, just 1,000 points less than mine.

And, like me, she had a copper-colored gate icon beside her score now too.

So she'd done it.

While I'd slept, she'd deciphered the inscription on the Copper Key.

Then she'd gone to Middletown, located the gate, and made it all the way through WarGames, just a few hours after I had.

I no longer felt quite so impressed with myself.

I flipped past a few more channels before stopping on one of the major newsfeed networks, where I saw two men sitting in front of a screenshot of the Scoreboard.

The man on the left, some middle-aged intellectual type billed as "Edgar Nash, Gunter Expert"

appeared to be explaining the scores to the newsfeed anchor beside him.

"-appears that the avatar named Parzival received slightly more points for being the first to find the Copper Key,"

Nash said, pointing to the Scoreboard.

"Then, early this morning, Parzival's score increased another one hundred thousand points, and a Copper Gate icon appeared beside his score.

The same change occurred to Art3mis's score a few hours later.

This seems to indicate that both of them have now completed the first of the three gates."

"The famous Three Gates that James Halliday spoke of in the Anorak's Invitation video?"

the anchor said.

"The very same."

"But Mr.

Nash.

After five years, how is it that two avatars accomplished this feat on the same day, within just a few hours of each other?"

"Well, I think there's only one plausible answer.

These two people, Parzival and Art3mis, must be working together.

They're probably both members of what is known as a 'gunter clan.' These are groups of egg hunters who-"

I frowned and changed the channel, surfing the feeds until I saw an overly enthusiastic reporter interviewing Ogden Morrow via satellite.

The Ogden Morrow.

"-joining us live from his home in Oregon.

Thanks for being with us today, Mr.

Morrow!"

"No problem,"

Morrow replied.

It had been almost six years since Morrow had last spoken to the media, but he didn't seem to have aged a day.

His wild gray hair and long beard made him look like a cross between Albert Einstein and Santa Claus.

That comparison was also a pretty good description of his personality.

The reporter cleared his throat, obviously a bit nervous.

"Let me start off by asking what your reaction is to the events of the last twenty-four hours.

Were you surprised to see those names appear on Halliday's Scoreboard?"

"Surprised?

Yes, a little, I suppose.

But 'excited' is probably a better word.

Like everyone else, I've been watching and waiting for this to happen.

Of course, I wasn't sure if I'd still be alive when it finally did!

I'm glad that I am.

It's all very exciting, isn't it?"

"Do you think these two gunters, Parzival and Art3mis, are working together?"

"I have no idea.

I suppose it's possible."

"As you know, Gregarious Simulation Systems keeps all OASIS user records confidential, so we have no way of knowing their true identities.

Do you think either of them will come forward and reveal themselves to the public?"

"Not if they're smart, they won't,"

Morrow said, adjusting his wire-rimmed spectacles.

"If I were in their shoes, I'd do everything possible to remain anonymous."

"Why do you say that?"

"Because once the world discovers who they really are, they'll never have a moment's peace afterward.

If people think you can help them find Halliday's egg, they'll never leave you alone.

Trust me, I know from experience."

"Yes, I suppose you do."

The reporter flashed a fake smile.

"However, this network has contacted both Parzival and Art3mis via e-mail, and we've extended generous monetary offers to each of them in return for an exclusive interview, either in the OASIS or here in the real world."

"I'm sure they're receiving many such offers.

But I doubt they'll accept,"

Morrow said.

Then he looked straight into the camera, and I felt as if he was now speaking directly to me.

"Anyone smart enough to accomplish what they have should know better than to risk everything by talking to the vultures in the media."

The reporter chuckled uncomfortably.

"Ah, Mr.

Morrow ...

I really don't think that's called for."

Morrow shrugged.

"Too bad.

I do."

The reporter cleared his throat again.

"Well, moving on ...

Do you have any predictions about what changes we might see on the Scoreboard in the weeks to come?"

"I'm betting that those other eight empty slots will fill up pretty quickly."

"What makes you think so?"

"One person can keep a secret, but not two,"

he replied, staring directly into the camera again.

"I don't know.

Maybe I'm wrong.

But I am sure of one thing.

The Sixers are going to use every dirty trick at their disposal to learn the location of the Copper Key and the First Gate."

"You're referring to the employees of Innovative Online Industries?"

"Yes.

IOI.

The Sixers.

Their sole purpose is to exploit loopholes in the contest rules and subvert the intention of Jim's will.

The very soul of the OASIS is at stake here.

The last thing Jim would have wanted is for his creation to fall into the hands of a fascist multinational conglomerate like IOI."

"Mr.

Morrow, IOI owns this network...."

"Of course they do!"

Morrow shouted gleefully.

"They own practically everything!

Including you, pretty boy!

I mean, did they tattoo a UPC code on your ass when they hired you to sit there and spout their corporate propaganda?"

The reporter began to stutter, glancing nervously at something off camera.

"Quick!"

Morrow said.

"You better cut me off before I say anything else!"

He broke up into gales of laughter just as the network cut his satellite feed.

The reporter took a few seconds to regroup, then said, "Thank you again for joining us today, Mr.

Morrow.

Unfortunately that's all the time we have to speak with him.

Now let's go back to Judy, who is standing by with a panel of renowned Halliday scholars-"

I smiled and closed the vidfeed window, pondering the old man's advice.

I'd always suspected that Morrow knew more about the contest than he was letting on.

Morrow and Halliday had grown up together, founded a company together, and changed the world together.

But Morrow had led a very different life from Halliday's-one involving a much greater connection to humanity.

And a great deal more tragedy.

During the mid-'90s, back when Gregarious Simulation Systems was still just Gregarious Games, Morrow had moved in with his high-school sweetheart, Kira Underwood.

Kira was born and raised in London.

(Her birth name was Karen, but she'd insisted on being called Kira ever since her first viewing of The Dark Crystal.) Morrow met her when she spent her junior year as an exchange student at his high school.

In his autobiography, Morrow wrote that she was the "quintessential geek girl,"

unabashedly obsessed with Monty Python, comic books, fantasy novels, and videogames.

She and Morrow shared a few classes at school, and he was smitten with her almost immediately.

He invited her to attend his weekly Dungeons & Dragons gaming sessions (just as he'd done with Halliday a few years earlier), and to his surprise, she accepted.

"She became the lone female in our weekly gaming group,"

Morrow wrote.

"And every single one of the guys developed a massive crush on her, including Jim.

She was actually the one who gave him the nickname 'Anorak,' a British slang term for an obsessive geek.

I think Jim adopted it as the name of his D and D character to impress her.

Or maybe it was his way of trying to let her know he was in on the joke.

The opposite sex made Jim extremely nervous, and Kira was the only girl I ever saw him speak to in a relaxed manner.

But even then, it was only in character, as Anorak, during the course of our gaming sessions.

And he would only address her as Leucosia, the name of her D and D character."

Ogden and Kira began dating.

By the end of the school year, when it was time for her to return home to London, the two of them had openly declared their love for each other.

They kept in touch during their remaining year of school by e- mailing every day, using an early pre-Internet computer bulletin board network called FidoNet.

When they both graduated from high school, Kira returned to the States, moved in with Morrow, and became one of Gregarious Games' first employees.

(For the first two years, she was their entire art department.) They got engaged a few years after the launch of the OASIS.

They were married a year later, at which time Kira resigned from her position as an artistic director at GSS.

(She was a millionaire now too, thanks to her company stock options.) Morrow stayed on at GSS for five more years.

Then, in the summer of 2022, he announced he was leaving the company.

At the time, he claimed it was for "personal reasons."

But years later, Morrow wrote in his autobiography that he'd left GSS because "we were no longer in the videogame business,"

and because he felt that the OASIS had evolved into something horrible.

"It had become a self-imposed prison for humanity,"

he wrote.

"A pleasant place for the world to hide from its problems while human civilization slowly collapses, primarily due to neglect."

Rumors also surfaced that Morrow had chosen to leave because he'd had a huge falling-out with Halliday.

Neither of them would confirm or deny these rumors, and no one seemed to know what sort of dispute had ended their long friendship.

But sources within the company said that at the time of Morrow's resignation, he and Halliday had not spoken to each other directly in several years.

Even so, when Morrow left GSS, he sold his entire share of the company directly to Halliday, for an undisclosed sum.

Ogden and Kira "retired"

to their home in Oregon and started a nonprofit educational software company, Halcydonia Interactive, which created free interactive adventure games for kids.

I'd grown up playing these games, all of which were set in the magical kingdom of Halcydonia.

Morrow's games had transported me out of my grim surroundings as a lonely kid growing up in the stacks.

They'd also taught me how to do math and solve puzzles while building my self-esteem.

In a way, the Morrows were among my very first teachers.

For the next decade, Ogden and Kira enjoyed a peaceful, happy existence, living and working in relative seclusion.

They tried to have children, but it wasn't in the cards for them.

They'd begun to consider adoption when, in the winter of 2034, Kira was killed in a car accident on an icy mountain road just a few miles from their home.

After that, Ogden continued to run Halcydonia Interactive on his own.

He managed to stay out of the limelight until the morning of Halliday's death, when his home was besieged by the media.

As Halliday's former closest friend, everyone assumed he alone could explain why the deceased billionaire had put his entire fortune up for grabs.

Morrow eventually held a press conference just to get everyone off his back.

It was the last time he'd spoken to the media, until today.

I'd watched the video of that press conference many, many times.

Morrow had begun it by reading a brief statement, saying that he hadn't seen or spoken to Halliday in over a decade.

"We had a falling-out,"

he said, "and that is something I refuse to discuss, now or in the future.

Suffice it to say, I have not communicated with James Halliday in over ten years."

"Then why did Halliday leave you his vast collection of classic coin-operated videogames?"

a reporter asked.

"All of his other material possessions are to be auctioned off.

If you were no longer friends, why are you the only person he left anything to?"

"I have no idea,"

Morrow said simply.

Another reporter asked Morrow if he planned on looking for Halliday's Easter egg himself, since he'd known Halliday so well and would therefore probably have a better chance than anyone of finding it.

Morrow reminded the reporter that the contest rules laid out in Halliday's will stated that no one who had ever worked for Gregarious Simulation Systems, or anyone in their immediate "Did you have any idea what Halliday was working on all those years he was in seclusion?"

another reporter asked.

"No.

I suspected he might be working on some new game.

Jim was always working on a new game.

For him, making games was as necessary as breathing.

But I never imagined he was planning something ...

of this magnitude."

"As the person who knew James Halliday the best, do you have any advice for the millions of people who are now searching for his Easter egg?

Where do you think people should start looking for it?"

"I think Jim made that pretty obvious,"

Morrow replied, tapping a finger against his temple, just as Halliday had in the Anorak's Invitation video.

"Jim always wanted everyone to share his obsessions, to love the same things he loved.

I think this contest is his way of giving the entire world an incentive to do just that."

I closed my file on Morrow and checked my e-mail.

The system informed me that I'd received over two million new unsolicited messages.

These were automatically filed in a separate folder, so I could sort through them later.

Only two new messages were left in my inbox, from people on my authorized contact list.

One was from Aech.

The other was from Art3mis.

I opened Aech's message first.

It was vidmail, and his avatar's face appeared in a window.

"Holy shit!"

he shouted.

"I don't believe this!

Now you've cleared the motherfucking First Gate and you still haven't phoned me?

Call my ass!

Now!

The second you get this!"

I considered waiting a few days to call Aech back but quickly abandoned that idea.

I needed to talk to someone about all this, and Aech was my best friend.

If there was anyone I could trust, it was him.

He picked up on the first ring, and his avatar appeared in a new window in front of me.

"You dog!"

he shouted.

"You brilliant, sly, devious dog!"

"Hey, Aech,"

I said, trying to deadpan it.

"What's new?"

"What's new?

What's new?

You mean, other than, you know, seeing my best friend's name appear at the top of the Scoreboard?

Other than that, you mean?"

He leaned forward so that his mouth completely filled the vidfeed window and shouted, "Other than that, not much!

Not much new at all!"

I laughed.

"Sorry it took me a while to call you.

I had kind of a late night."

"No shit, you had a late night!"

he said.

"Look at you!

How can you be so calm!

Don't you realize what this means?

This is huge!

This is beyond epic!

I mean ...

congratu-freakin'-lations, man!"

He began to bow repeatedly.

"I am not worthy!"

"Cut it out, OK?

It's really not a big deal.

I haven't actually won anything yet.

..."

"Not a big deal!"

he cried.

"Not.

A.

Big.

Deal?

Are you kidding me?

You're a legend now, man!

You just became the first gunter in history to find the Copper Key!

And clear the First Gate!

You are a god, from this moment forth!

Do you not realize this, fool?"

"Seriously.

Stop it.

I'm already freaked out enough as it is."

"Have you seen the news?

The whole world is freaking out!

And the gunter boards are going apeshit!

And everyone is talking about you, amigo."

"I know.

Listen, I hope you're not pissed at me for keeping you in the dark.

I felt really weird about not returning your calls or telling you what I was up to.

..."

"Oh, come on!"

He rolled his eyes dismissively.

"You know damn well that if I'd been in your shoes, I would have done the same thing.

That's how the game is played.

But"-his tone grew more serious-"I am curious to know how that Art3mis chick happened to find the Copper Key and clear the gate right after you did.

Everyone seems to think you two were working together, but I know that's horseshit.

So what happened?

Was she following you or something?"

I shook my head.

"No, she found the key's hiding place before I did.

Last month, she said.

She just wasn't able to obtain the key until now."

I was silent for a second.

"I can't really go into the details without, you know-"

Aech held up both hands.

"No worries.

I totally understand.

I wouldn't want for you to accidentally drop any hints."

He flashed his trademark Cheshire grin, and his gleaming white teeth seemed to take up half of the vidfeed window.

"Actually, I should let you know where I am right now...."

He adjusted his vidfeed's virtual camera so that it pulled back from a tight shot of his face to a much wider shot that revealed where he was-standing next to the flat-topped hill, just outside the entrance to the Tomb of Horrors.

My jaw dropped.

"How in the hell-?"

"Well, when I saw your name all over the newsfeeds last night, it occurred to me that for as long as I've known you, you've never had the dough to do much traveling.

Any traveling, really.

So I figured that if you'd found the hiding place of the Copper Key, it probably had to be somewhere close to Ludus.

Or maybe even on Ludus."

"Well done,"

I said, and I meant it.

"Not really.

I spent hours racking my pea-sized brain before I finally thought to search the map of Ludus for the surface features described in the Tomb of Horrors module.

But once I did, everything else clicked into place.

And here I am."

"Congratulations."

"Yeah, well, it was pretty easy once you pointed me in the right direction."

He glanced back over his shoulder at the tomb.

"I've been searching for this place for years, and all this time it was within walking distance of my school!

I feel like a total moron for not figuring it out on my own."

"You're not a moron,"

I said.

"You deciphered the Limerick on your own, otherwise you wouldn't even know about the Tomb of Horrors module, right?"

"So, you're not pissed?"

he said.

"That I took advantage of my inside info?"

I shook my head.

"No way.

I would have done the same thing."

"Well, regardless, I owe you one.

And I won't forget it."

I nodded toward the tomb behind him.

"Have you been inside yet?"

"Yeah.

I came back up here to call you, while I wait for the server to reset at midnight.

The tomb is empty right now, because your friend, Art3mis, already blew through here earlier today."

"We're not friends,"

I said.

"She just showed up, a few minutes after I got the key."

"Did you guys throw down?"

"No.

The tomb is a no-PvP zone."

I glanced at the time.

"Looks like you've still got a few hours to kill before the reset."

"Yeah.

I've been studying the original D and D module, trying to prepare myself,"

he said.

"Wanna give me any tips?"

I grinned.

"No.

Not really."

"Didn't think so."

He was silent for a few seconds.

"Listen, I have to ask you something,"

he said.

"Does anyone at your school know your avatar's name?"

"No.

I've been careful to keep it a secret.

No one there knows me as Parzival.

Not even the teachers."

"Good,"

he said.

"I took the same precaution.

Unfortunately, several of the gunters who frequent the Basement know that we both attend school on Ludus, so they might be able to connect the dots.

I'm worried about one in particular.

..."

I felt a rush of panic.

"I-r0k?"

Aech nodded.

"He's been calling me nonstop since your name appeared on the Scoreboard, asking what I know.

I played dumb, and he seemed to buy it.

But if my name shows up on the Scoreboard too, you can bet he'll start bragging that he knows us.

And when he starts telling other gunters that you and I are both students on Ludus-"

"Shit!"

I cursed.

"Then every gunter in the sim will be headed here to search for the Copper Key."

"Right,"

Aech said.

"And before long, the location of the tomb will be common knowledge."

I sighed.

"Well, then you better get the key before that happens."

"I'll do my best."

He held up a copy of the Tomb of Horrors module.

"Now, if you'll excuse me, I'm going to reread this thing for the hundredth time today."

"Good luck, Aech,"

I said.

"Give me a call once you've cleared the gate."

"If I clear the gate ..."

"You will,"

I said.

"And when you do, we should meet in the Basement to talk."

"You got it, amigo."

He waved good-bye and was about to end the call when I spoke up.

"Hey, Aech?"

"Yeah?"

"You might want to brush up on your jousting skills,"

I said.

"You know, between now and midnight."

He looked puzzled for a moment; then a smile of understanding spread across his face.

"I got ya,"

he said.

"Thanks, pal."

"Good luck."

As his vidfeed window winked out, I found myself wondering how Aech and I would remain friends through everything that lay ahead.

Neither of us wanted to work as a team, so from here on out we would be in direct competition with each other.

Would I eventually regret helping him today?

Or come to resent that I'd unwittingly led him to the Copper Key's hiding place?

I pushed these thoughts aside and opened the e-mail from Art3mis.

It was an old-fashioned text message.

Dear Parzival, Congrats!

See?

You're famous now, just like I said.

Although it looks like we've both been thrust into the limelight.

Kinda scary, eh?

Thanks for the tip about playing on the left side.

You were right.

Somehow, that did the trick.

But don't go thinking I owe you any favors, mister.

:-) The First Gate was pretty wild, wasn't it?

Not at all what I expected.

It would have been cool if Halliday had given me the option to play Ally Sheedy instead, but what can you do?

This new riddle is a real head-scratcher, isn't it?

I hope it doesn't take us another five years to decipher it.

Anyhow, I just wanted to say that it was an honor to meet you.

I hope our paths cross again soon.

Sincerely, Art3mis ps-Enjoy being #1 while you can, pal.

It won't last for long.

I reread her message several times, grinning like a dopey schoolboy.

Then I typed out my reply: Dear Art3mis, Congratulations to you, too.

You weren't kidding.

Competition clearly brings out the best in you.

You're welcome for the tip about playing on the left.

You totally owe me a favor now.

;-) The new riddle is a cinch.

I think I've already got it figured out, actually.

What's the hold-up on your end?

It was an honor to meet you, too.

If you ever feel like hanging out in a chat room, let me know.

MTFBWYA, Parzival ps-Are you challenging me?

Bring the pain, woman.

After rewriting it a few dozen times, I tapped the Send button.

Then I pulled up my screenshot of the Jade Key riddle and began to study it, syllable by syllable.

But I couldn't seem to concentrate.

No matter how hard I tried to focus, my mind kept drifting back to Art3mis.

Aech cleared the First Gate early the next day.

His name appeared on the Scoreboard in third place, with a score of 108,000 points.

The value of obtaining the Copper Key had dropped another 1,000 points for him, but the value of clearing the First Gate remained unchanged at 100,000.

I returned to school that same morning.

I'd considered calling in sick, but was concerned that my absence might raise suspicions.

When I got there, I realized I shouldn't have worried.

Due to the sudden renewed interest in the Hunt, over half of the student body, and quite a few of the teachers, didn't bother showing up.

Since everyone at school knew my avatar by the name Wade3, no one paid any attention to me.

Roaming the halls unnoticed, I decided that I enjoyed having a secret identity.

It made me feel like Clark Kent or Peter Parker.

I thought my dad would probably have gotten a kick out of that.

That afternoon, I-r0k sent e-mails to Aech and me, attempting to blackmail us.

He said that if we didn't tell him how to find the Copper Key and the First Gate, he would post what he knew about us to every gunter message board he could find.

When we refused, he made good on his threat and began telling anyone who would listen that Aech and I were both students on Ludus.

Of course, he had no way of proving he really knew us, and by that time there were hundreds of other gunters claiming to be our close personal friends, so Aech and I were hoping his posts would go unnoticed.

But they didn't, of course.

At least two other gunters were sharp enough to connect the dots between Ludus, the Limerick, and the Tomb of Horrors.

The day after I-r0k let the cat out of the bag, the name "Daito"

appeared in the fourth slot on the Scoreboard.

Then, less than fifteen minutes later, the name "Shoto"

appeared in the fifth slot.

Somehow, they'd both obtained a copy of the Copper Key on the same day, without waiting for the server to reset at midnight.

Then, a few hours later, both Daito and Shoto cleared the First Gate.

No one had ever heard of these avatars before, but their names seemed to indicate they were working together, either as a duo or as part of a clan.

Shoto and daito were the Japanese names for the short and long swords worn by samurai.

When worn as a set, the two swords were called daisho, and this quickly became the nickname by which the two of them were known.

Only four days had passed since my name had first appeared on the Scoreboard, and one new name had appeared below mine on each subsequent day.

The secret was out now, and the hunt seemed to be shifting into high gear.

All week, I was unable to focus on anything my teachers were saying.

Luckily, I only had two months of school left, and I'd already earned enough credits to graduate, even if I coasted from here on out.

So I drifted from one class to the next in a daze, puzzling over the Jade Key riddle, reciting it again and again in my mind.

The captain conceals the Jade Key in a dwelling long neglected But you can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected According to my English Lit textbook, a poem with four lines of text and an alternate-line rhyme scheme was known as a quatrain, so that became my nickname for the riddle.

Each night after school, I logged out of the OASIS and filled the blank pages of my grail diary with possible interpretations of the Quatrain.

What "captain"

was Anorak talking about?

Captain Kangaroo?

Captain America?

Captain Buck Rogers in the twenty-fifth century?

And where in the hell was this "dwelling long neglected"?

That part of the clue seemed maddeningly nonspecific.

Halliday's boyhood home on Middletown couldn't really be classified as "neglected,"

but maybe he was talking about a different house in his hometown?

That seemed too easy, and too close to the hiding place of the Copper Key.

At first, I thought the neglected dwelling might be a reference to Revenge of the Nerds, one of Halliday's favorite films.

In that movie, the nerds of the title rent a dilapidated house and fix it up (during a classic '80s music montage).

I visited a re-creation of the Revenge of the Nerds house on the planet Skolnick and spent a day searching it, but it proved to be a dead end.

The last two lines of the Quatrain were also a complete mystery.

They seemed to say that once you found the neglected dwelling, you would have to collect a bunch of "trophies"

and then blow some kind of whistle.

Or did that line mean blow the whistle in the colloquial sense, as in "to reveal a secret or alert someone to a crime"?

Either way, it didn't make any sense to me.

But I continued to go over each line, word by word, until my brain began to feel like Aquafresh toothpaste.

That Friday after school, the day Daito and Shoto cleared the First Gate, I was sitting in a secluded spot a few miles from my school, a steep hill with a solitary tree at the top.

I liked to come here to read, to do my homework, or to simply enjoy the view of the surrounding green fields.

I didn't have access to that kind of view in the real world.

As I sat under the tree, I sorted through the millions of messages still clogging my inbox.

I'd been sifting through them all week.

I'd received notes from people all over the globe.

Letters of congratulation.

Pleas for help.

Death threats.

Interview requests.

Several long, incoherent diatribes from gunters whose quest for the egg had clearly driven them insane.

I'd also received invitations to join four of the biggest gunter clans: the Oviraptors, Clan Destiny, the Key Masters, and Team Banzai.

I told each of them thanks, but no thanks.

When I got tired of reading my "fan mail,"

I sorted out all the messages that were tagged as "business related"

and began reading through those.

I discovered that I'd received several offers from movie studios and book publishers, all interested in buying the rights to my life story.

I deleted them all, because I'd decided never to reveal my true identity to the world.

At least, not until after I found the egg.

I'd also received several endorsement-deal offers from companies who wanted to use Parzival's name and face to sell their services and products.

An electronics retailer was interested in using my avatar to promote their line of OASIS immersion hardware so they could sell "Parzival-approved"

haptic rigs, gloves, and visors.

I also had offers from a pizza-delivery chain, a shoe manufacturer, and an online store that sold custom avatar skins.

There was even a toy company that wanted to manufacture a line of Parzival lunch boxes and action figures.

These companies were offering to pay me in OASIS credits, which would be transferred directly to my avatar's account.

I couldn't believe my luck.

I replied to every single one of the endorsement inquires, saying that I would accept their offers under the following conditions: I wouldn't have to reveal my true identity, and I would only do business through my OASIS avatar.

I started receiving replies within the hour, with contracts attached.

I couldn't afford to have a lawyer look them over, but they all expired within a year's time, so I just went ahead and signed them electronically and e-mailed them back along with a three-dimensional model of my avatar, to be used for the commercials.

I also received requests for an audio clip of my avatar's voice, so I sent them a synthesized clip of a deep baritone that made me sound like one of those guys who did voice-overs for movie trailers.

Once they received everything, my avatar's new sponsors informed me that they'd wire my first round of payments to my OASIS account within the next forty-eight hours.

The amount of money I was going to receive wouldn't be enough to make me rich.

Not by a long shot.

But to a kid who'd grown up with nothing, it seemed like a fortune.

I did some quick calculations.

If I lived frugally, I would have enough to move out of the stacks and rent a small efficiency apartment somewhere.

For a year, at least.

The very thought filled me with nervous excitement.

I'd dreamed of escaping the stacks for as long as I could remember, and now it appeared that dream was about to come true.

With the endorsement deals taken care of, I continued to sort through my e- mail messages.

When I sorted the remaining messages by sender, I discovered that I'd received over five thousand e-mails from Innovative Online Industries.

Actually, they'd sent me five thousand copies of the same e-mail.

They'd been resending the same message all week, since my name first appeared on the Scoreboard.

And they were still resending it, once every minute.

The Sixers were mail-bombing me, to make sure they got my attention.

The e-mails were all marked Maximum Priority, with the subject line URGENT BUSINESS PROPOSITION-PLEASE READ IMMEDIATELY!

The second I opened one, a delivery confirmation was sent back to IOI, letting them know that I was finally reading their message.

After that, they stopped resending it.

Dear Parzival, First, allow me to congratulate you on your recent accomplishments, which we at Innovative Online Industries hold in the highest regard.

On behalf of IOI, I wish to make you a highly lucrative business proposition, the exact details of which we can discuss in a private chatlink session.

Please use the attached contact card to reach me at your earliest convenience, regardless of the day or hour.

Given our reputation within the gunter community, I would understand if you were hesitant to speak with me.

However, please be aware that if you choose not to accept our proposal, we intend to approach each of your competitors.

At the very least, we hope you'll do us the honor of being the first to hear our generous offer.

What have you got to lose?

Thank you for your kind attention.

I look forward to speaking with you.

Sincerely, Nolan Sorrento Head of Operations Innovative Online Industries Despite the message's reasonable tone, the threat behind it was crystal clear.

The Sixers wanted to recruit me.

Or they wanted to pay me to tell them how to find the Copper Key and clear the First Gate.

And if I refused, they would go after Art3mis, then Aech, Daito, Shoto, and every other gunter who managed to get their name up on the Scoreboard.

These shameless corporate sleazebags wouldn't stop until they found someone dumb enough or desperate enough to give in and sell them the information they needed.

My first impulse was to delete every single copy of the e-mail and pretend I'd never received it, but I changed my mind.

I wanted to know exactly what IOI was going to offer.

And I couldn't pass up the chance to meet Nolan Sorrento, the Sixers' infamous leader.

There was no danger meeting with him via chatlink, as long as I was careful about what I said.

I considered teleporting to Incipio before my "interview,"

to buy a new skin for my avatar.

Maybe a tailored suit.

Something flashy and expensive.

But then I thought better of it.

I had nothing to prove to that corporate asshat.

After all, I was famous now.

I would roll into the meeting wearing my default skin and a fuck-off attitude.

I would listen to their offer, then tell them to kiss my simulated ass.

Maybe I'd record the whole thing and post it on YouTube.

I prepped for the meeting by pulling up a search engine and learning everything I could about Nolan Sorrento.

He had a PhD in Computer Science.

Prior to becoming head of operations at IOI, he'd been a high-profile game designer, overseeing the creation of several third-party RPGs that ran inside the OASIS.

I'd played all of his games, and they were actually pretty good.

He'd been a decent coder, back before he sold his soul.

It was obvious why IOI had hired him to lead their lackeys.

They figured a game designer would have the best chance of solving Halliday's grand videogame puzzle.

But Sorrento and the Sixers had been at it for over five years and still had nothing to show for their efforts.

And now that gunter avatar names were appearing on the Scoreboard left and right, the IOI brass had to be freaking out.

Sorrento was probably catching all kinds of heat from his superiors.

I wondered if it had been Sorrento's idea to try to recruit me, or if he'd been ordered to do it.

Once I'd done my homework on Sorrento, I felt like I was ready to sit down with the devil.

I pulled up the contact card attached to Sorrento's e-mail and tapped the chatlink invitation icon at the bottom.

As I finished connecting to the chatlink session, my avatar materialized on a grand observation deck with a stunning view of over a dozen OASIS worlds suspended in black space beyond the curved window.

I appeared to be on a space station or a very large transport ship; I couldn't tell which.

Chatlink sessions worked differently from chat rooms, and they were a lot more expensive to host.

When you opened a chatlink, an insubstantial copy of your avatar was projected into another OASIS location.

Your avatar wasn't actually there, and so it appeared to other avatars as a slightly transparent apparition.

But you could still interact with the environment in a limited way- walking through doors, sitting in chairs, and so forth.

Chatlinks were primarily used for business purposes, when a company wanted to host a meeting in a specific OASIS location without spending the time and money to transport everyone's avatars to it.

This was the first time I'd ever used one.

I turned around and saw that my avatar was standing in front of a large C- shaped reception desk.

The IOI corporate logo-giant, overlapping chrome letters twenty feet tall-floated above it.

As I approached the desk, an impossibly beautiful blonde receptionist stood to greet me.

"Mr.

Parzival,"

she said, bowing slightly.

"Welcome to Innovative Online Industries!

Just a moment.

Mr.

Sorrento is already on his way to greet you."

I wasn't sure how that could be, since I hadn't warned them I was coming.

While I waited, I tried to activate my avatar's vidfeed recorder, but IOI had disabled recording in this chatlink session.

They obviously didn't want me to have video evidence of what was about to go down.

So much for my plan to post the interview on YouTube.

Less than a minute later, another avatar appeared, through a set of automatic doors on the opposite side of the observation deck.

He headed right for me, boots clicking on the polished floor.

It was Sorrento.

I recognized him because he wasn't using a standard-issue Sixer avatar-one of the perks of his position.

His avatar's face matched the photos of him I'd seen online.

Blond hair and brown eyes, a hawkish nose.

He did wear the standard Sixer uniform-a navy blue bodysuit with gold epaulettes at the shoulders and a silver IOI logo on his right breast, with his employee number printed beneath it: 655321.

"At last!"

he said as he walked up, grinning like a jackal.

"The famous Parzival has graced us with his presence!"

He extended a gloved right hand.

"Nolan Sorrento, chief of operations.

It's an honor to meet you."

"Yeah,"

I said, doing my best to sound aloof.

"Likewise, I guess."

Even as a chatlink projection, my avatar could still mime shaking his outstretched hand.

Instead I just stared down at it as if he were offering me a dead rat.

He dropped it after a few seconds, but his smile didn't falter.

It broadened.

"Please follow me."

He led me across the deck and back through the automatic doors, which slid open to reveal a large launching bay.

It contained a single interplanetary shuttlecraft emblazoned with the IOI logo.

Sorrento began to board it, but I halted at the foot of the ramp.

"Why bother bringing me here via a chatlink?"

I asked, motioning to the bay around us.

"Why not just give me your sales pitch in a chat room?"

"Please, indulge me,"

he said.

"This chatlink is part of our sales pitch.

We want to give you the same experience you'd have if you came to visit our headquarters in person."

Right, I thought.

If I had come here in person, my avatar would be surrounded by thousands of Sixers and I'd be at your mercy.

I joined him inside the shuttle.

The ramp retracted and we launched out of the bay.

Through the ship's wraparound windows I saw that we were leaving one of the Sixers' orbital space stations.

Looming directly ahead of us was the planet IOI-1, a massive chrome globe.

It reminded me of the killer floating spheres in the Phantasm films.

Gunters referred to IOI-1 as "the Sixer homeworld."

The company had constructed it shortly after the contest began, to serve as IOI's online base of operations.

Our shuttle, which seemed to be flying on automatic pilot, quickly reached the planet and began to skim its mirrored surface.

I stared out the window as we did one complete orbit.

As far as I knew, no gunter had ever been given this kind of tour.

From pole to pole, IOI-1 was covered with armories, bunkers, warehouses, and vehicle hangars.

I also saw airfields dotting the surface, where rows of gleaming gunships, spacecraft, and mechanized battle tanks stood waiting for action.

Sorrento said nothing as we surveyed the Sixer armada.

He just let me take it all in.

I'd seen screenshots of IOI-1's surface before, but they'd been low-res and taken from high orbit, just beyond the planet's impressive defense grid.

The larger clans had been openly plotting to nuke the Sixer Operations Complex for several years now, but they'd never managed to get past the defense grid or reach the planet's surface.

As we completed our orbit, the IOI Operations Complex swung into view ahead of us.

It consisted of three mirror-surfaced towers-two rectangular skyscrapers on either side of a circular one.

Seen from above, these three buildings formed the IOI logo.

The shuttle slowed and hovered above the O-shaped tower, then spiraled down to a small landing pad on the roof.

"Impressive digs, wouldn't you agree?"

Sorrento said, finally breaking his silence as we touched down and the ramp lowered.

"Not bad."

I was proud of the calm in my voice.

In truth, I was still reeling from everything I'd just seen.

"This is an OASIS replica of the real IOI towers located in downtown Columbus, right?"

I said.

Sorrento nodded.

"Yes, the Columbus complex is our company headquarters.

Most of my team works in this central tower.

Our close proximity to GSS eliminates any possibility of system lag.

And, of course, Columbus doesn't suffer from the rolling power blackouts that plague most major U.S.

cities."

He was stating the obvious.

Gregarious Simulation Systems was located in Columbus, and so was their main OASIS server vault.

Redundant mirror servers were located all over the world, but they were all linked to the main node in Columbus.

This was why, in the decades since the simulation's launch, the city had become a kind of high-tech Mecca.

Columbus was where an OASIS user could get the fastest, most reliable connection to the simulation.

Most gunters dreamed of moving there someday, me included.

I followed Sorrento off the shuttle and into an elevator adjacent to the landing pad.

"You've become quite the celebrity these past few days,"

he said as we began to descend.

"It must be very exciting for you.

Probably a little scary, too, huh?

Knowing you now possess information that millions of people would be willing to kill for?"

I'd been waiting for him to say something like this, so I had a reply prepared.

"Do you mind skipping the scare tactics and the head games?

Just tell me the details of your offer.

I have other matters to attend to."

He grinned at me like I was a precocious child.

"Yes, I'm sure you do,"

he said.

"But please don't jump to any conclusions about our offer.

I think you'll be quite surprised."

Then, with a sudden touch of steel in his tone, he added, "In fact, I'm certain of it."

Doing my best to hide the intimidation I felt, I rolled my eyes and said, "Whatever, man."

A tone sounded as we reached the 106th floor, and the elevator doors swished open.

I followed Sorrento past another receptionist and down a long, brightly lit corridor.

The decor was something out of a utopian sci-fi flick.

High-tech and immaculate.

We passed several other Sixer avatars as we walked, and the moment they saw Sorrento, they each snapped to rigid attention and saluted him, as if he were some high-ranking general.

Sorrento didn't return these salutes or acknowledge his underlings in any way.

Eventually, he led me into a huge open room that appeared to occupy most of the 106th floor.

It contained a vast sea of high-walled cubicles, each containing a single person strapped into a high-end immersion rig.

"Welcome to IOI's Oology Division,"

Sorrento said with obvious pride.

"So, this is Sux0rz Central, eh?"

I said, glancing around.

"There's no need to be rude,"

Sorrento said.

"This could be your team."

"Would I get my very own cubicle?"

"No.

You'd have your own office, with a very nice view."

He grinned.

"Not that you'd spend much time looking at it."

I motioned to one of the new Habashaw immersion rigs.

"Nice gear,"

I said.

It really was, too.

State-of-the-art.

"Yes, it is nice, isn't it?"

he said.

"Our immersion rigs are heavily modified, and they're all networked together.

Our systems allow multiple operators to control any one of our oologist's avatars.

So depending on the obstacles an avatar encounters during their quest, control can be instantly transferred to the team member with the skills best suited to deal with the situation."

"Yeah, but that's cheating,"

I said.

"Oh, come on now,"

he said, rolling his eyes.

"There's no such thing.

Halliday's contest doesn't have any rules.

That's one of the many colossal mistakes the old fool made."

Before I could reply, Sorrento started walking again, leading me on through the maze of cubicles.

"All of our oologists are voice-linked to a support team,"

he continued.

"Composed of Halliday scholars, videogame experts, pop-culture historians, and cryptologists.

They all work together to help each of our avatars overcome any challenge and solve every puzzle they encounter."

He turned and grinned at me.

"As you can see, we've covered all the bases, Parzival.

That's why we're going to win."

"Yeah,"

I said.

"You guys have been doing a bang-up job so far.

Bravo.

Now, why is it that we're talking again?

Oh, right.

You guys have no clue where the Copper Key is, and you need my help to find it."

Sorrento narrowed his eyes; then he began to laugh.

"I like you, kid,"

he said, grinning at me.

"You're bright.

And you've got cojones.

Two qualities I greatly admire."

We continued walking.

A few minutes later, we arrived in Sorrento's enormous office.

Its windows afforded a stunning view of the surrounding "city."

The sky was filled with aircars and spacecraft, and the planet's simulated sun was just beginning to set.

Sorrento sat down behind his desk and offered me the chair directly across from him.

Here we go, I thought as I sat down.

Play it cool, Wade.

"So I'll just cut to the chase,"

he said.

"IOI wants to recruit you.

As a consultant, to assist with our search for Halliday's Easter egg.

You'll have all of our company's vast resources at your disposal.

Money, weapons, magic items, ships, artifacts.

You name it."

"What would my title be?"

"Chief oologist,"

he replied.

"You'd be in charge of the entire division, second-in-command only to me.

I'm talking about five thousand highly trained combat-ready avatars, all taking orders directly from you."

"Sounds pretty sweet,"

I said, trying hard to sound nonchalant.

"Of course it does.

But there's more.

In exchange for your services, we're willing to pay you two million dollars a year, with a one-million-dollar signing bonus up front.

And if and when you help us find the egg, you'll get a twenty- five-million-dollar bonus."

I pretended to add all of those numbers up on my fingers.

"Wow,"

I said, trying to sound impressed.

"Can I work from home, too?"

Sorrento couldn't seem to tell whether or not I was joking.

"No,"

he said.

"I'm afraid not.

You'd have to relocate here to Columbus.

But we'll provide you with excellent living quarters here on the premises.

And a private office, of course.

Your own state-of-the-art immersion rig-"

"Hold on,"

I said, holding up a hand.

"You mean I'd have to live in the IOI skyscraper?

With you?

And all of the other Sux- oologists?"

He nodded.

"Just until you help us find the egg."

I resisted the urge to gag.

"What about benefits?

Would I get health care?

Dental?

Vision?

Keys to the executive washroom?

Shit like that?"

"Of course."

He was starting to sound impatient.

"So?

What do you say?"

"Can I think about it for a few days?"

"Afraid not,"

he said.

"This could all be over in a few days.

We need your answer now."

I leaned back and stared at the ceiling, pretending to consider the offer.

Sorrento waited, watching me intently.

I was about to give him my prepared answer when he raised a hand.

"Just listen to me a moment before you answer,"

Sorrento said.

"I know most gunters cling to the absurd notion that IOI is evil.

And that the Sixers are ruthless corporate drones with no honor and no respect for the 'true spirit' of the contest.

That we're all sellouts.

Right?"

I nodded, barely resisting the urge to say "That's putting it mildly."

"Well, that's ridiculous,"

he said, flashing an avuncular grin that I suspected was generated by whatever diplomacy software he was running.

"The Sixers are really no different than a Gunter clan, albeit a well-funded one.

We share all the same obsessions as gunters.

And we have the same goal."

What goal is that?

I wanted to shout.

To ruin the OASIS forever?

To pervert and defile the only thing that has ever made our lives bearable?

Sorrento seemed to take my silence as a cue that he should continue.

"You know, contrary to popular belief, the OASIS really won't change that drastically when IOI takes control of it.

Sure, we'll have to start charging everyone a monthly user fee.

And increase the sim's advertising revenue.

But we also plan to make a lot of improvements.

Avatar content filters.

Stricter construction guidelines.

We're going to make the OASIS a better place."

No, I thought.

You're going to turn it into a fascist corporate theme park where the few people who can still afford the price of admission no longer have an ounce of freedom.

I'd heard as much of this jerk's sales pitch as I could stand.

"OK,"

I said.

"Count me in.

Sign me up.

Whatever you guys call it.

I'm in."

Sorrento looked surprised.

This clearly wasn't the answer he'd been expecting.

He smiled wide and was about to offer me his hand again when I cut him off.

"But I have three minor conditions,"

I said.

"First, I want a fifty-million-dollar bonus when I find the egg for you guys.

Not twenty-five.

Is that doable?"

He didn't even hesitate.

"Done.

What are your other conditions?"

"I don't want to be second-in-command,"

I said.

"I want your job, Sorrento.

I want to be in charge of the whole shebang.

Chief of operations.

El Numero Uno.

Oh, and I want everyone to have to call me El Numero Uno, too.

Is that possible?"

My mouth seemed to be operating independent of my brain.

I couldn't help myself.

Sorrento's smile had vanished.

"What else?"

"I don't want to work with you."

I leveled a finger at him.

"You give me the creeps.

But if your superiors are willing to fire your ass and give me your position, I'm in.

It's a done deal."

Silence.

Sorrento's face was a stoic mask.

He probably had certain emotions, like anger and rage, filtered out on his facial-recognition software.

"Could you check with your bosses and let me know if they'll agree to that?"

I asked.

"Or are they monitoring us right now?

I'm betting they are."

I waved to the invisible cameras.

"Hi, guys!

What do you say?"

There was a long silence, during which Sorrento simply glared at me.

"Of course they're monitoring us,"

he said finally.

"And they've just informed me that they're willing to agree to each of your demands."

He didn't sound all that upset.

"Really?"

I said.

"Great!

When can I start?

And more importantly, when can you leave?"

"Immediately,"

he said.

"The company will prepare your contract and send it to your lawyer for approval.

Then we-they will fly you here to Columbus to sign the paperwork and close the deal."

He stood.

"That should conclude-"

"Actually-"

I held up a hand, cutting him off again.

"I've spent the last few seconds thinking this over a bit more, and I'm gonna have to pass on your offer.

I think I'd rather find the egg on my own, thanks."

I stood up.

"You and the other Sux0rz can all go fuck a duck."

Sorrento began to laugh.

A long, hearty laugh that I found more than a little disturbing.

"Oh, you're good!

That was so good!

You really had us going there, kid!"

When his laughter tapered off, he said, "That's the answer I was expecting.

So now, let me give you our second proposal."

"There's more?"

I sat back down and put my feet up on his desk.

"OK.

Shoot."

"We'll wire five million dollars directly to your OASIS account, right now, in exchange for a walkthrough up to the First Gate.

That's it.

All you have to do is give us detailed step-by-step instructions on how to do what you've already done.

We'll take it from there.

You'll be free to continue searching for the egg on your own.

And our transaction will remain a complete secret.

No one ever need know of it."

I admit, I actually considered it for a second.

Five million dollars would set me up for life.

And even if I helped the Sixers clear the First Gate, there was no guarantee they'd be able to clear the other two.

I still wasn't even sure if I would be able to do that.

"Trust me, son,"

Sorrento said.

"You should take this offer.

While you can."

His paternal tone irked me to no end, and that helped to steel my resolve.

I couldn't sell out to the Sixers.

If I did, and they did somehow manage to win the contest, I'd be the one responsible.

There was no way I'd be able to live with that.

I just hoped that Aech, Art3mis, and any other gunters they approached felt the same way.

"I'll pass,"

I said.

I slid my feet off his desk and stood.

"Thanks for your time."

Sorrento looked at me sadly, then motioned for me to sit back down.

"Actually, we're not quite done here.

We have one final proposal for you, Parzival.

And I saved the best for last."

"Can't you take a hint?

You can't buy me.

So piss off.

Adios.

Good.

Bye."

"Sit down, Wade."

I froze.

Had he just used my real name?

"That's right,"

Sorrento barked.

"We know who you are.

Wade Owen Watts.

Born August twelfth, 2024.

Both parents deceased.

And we also know where you are.

You reside with your aunt, in a trailer park located at 700 Portland Avenue in Oklahoma City.

Unit 56-K, to be exact.

According to our surveillance team, you were last seen entering your aunt's trailer three days ago and you haven't left since.

Which means you're still there right now."

A vidfeed window opened directly behind him, displaying a live video image of the stacks where I lived.

It was an aerial view, maybe being shot from a plane or a satellite.

From this angle, they could only monitor the trailer's two main exits.

So they hadn't seen me leave through the laundry room window each morning, or return through it each night.

They didn't know I was actually in my hideout right now.

"There you are,"

Sorrento said.

His pleasant, condescending tone had returned.

"You should really get out more, Wade.

It's not healthy to spend all of your time indoors."

The image magnified a few times, zooming in on my aunt's trailer.

Then it switched over to thermal-imaging mode, and I could see the glowing outlines of over a dozen people, children and adults, sitting inside.

Nearly all of them were motionless-probably logged into the OASIS.

I was too stunned to speak.

How had they found me?

It was supposed to be impossible for anyone to obtain your OASIS account information.

And my address wasn't even in my OASIS account.

You didn't have to provide it when you created your avatar.

Just your name and retinal pattern.

So how had they found out where I lived?

Somehow they must have gotten access to my school records.

"Your first instinct right now might be to log out and make a run for it,"

Sorrento said.

"I urge you not to make that mistake.

Your trailer is currently wired with a large quantity of high explosives."

He pulled something that looked like a remote control out of his pocket and held it up.

"And my finger is on the detonator.

If you log out of this chatlink session, you will die within a few seconds.

Do you understand what I'm saying to you, Mr.

Watts?"

I nodded slowly, trying desperately to get a grip on the situation.

He was bluffing.

He had to be bluffing.

And even if he wasn't, he didn't know that I was actually half a mile away, in my hideout.

Sorrento assumed that one of the glowing thermal outlines on the display was me.

If a bomb really did go off in my aunt's trailer, I'd be safe down here, under all these junk cars.

Wouldn't I?

Besides, they would never kill all those people just to get to me.

"How-?"

That was all I could get out.

"How did we find out who you are?

And where you live?"

He grinned.

"Easy.

You screwed up, kid.

When you enrolled in the OASIS public school system, you gave them your name and address.

So they could mail you your report cards, I suppose."

He was right.

My avatar's name, my real name, and my home address were all stored in my private student file, which only the principal could access.

It was a stupid mistake, but I'd enrolled the year before the contest even began.

Before I became a gunter.

Before I learned to conceal my real-world identity.

"How did you find out I attend school online?"

I asked.

I already knew the answer, but I needed to stall for time.

"There's been a rumor circulating on the gunter message boards the past few days that you and your pal Aech both go to school on Ludus.

When we heard that, we decided to contact a few OPS administrators and offer them a bribe.

Do you know how little a school administrator makes a year, Wade?

It's scandalous.

One of your principals was kind enough to search the student database for the avatar name Parzival, and guess what?"

Another window appeared beside the live video feed of the stacks.

It displayed my entire student profile.

My full name, avatar name, student alias (Wade3), date of birth, Social Security number, and home address.

My school transcripts.

It was all there, along with an old yearbook photo, taken over five years ago-right before I'd transferred to school in the OASIS.

"We have your friend Aech's school records too.

But he was smart enough to give a fake name and address when he enrolled.

So finding him will take a bit longer."

He paused to let me reply, but I remained silent.

My pulse was racing, and I had to keep reminding myself to breathe.

"So, that brings me to our final proposal."

Sorrento rubbed his hands together excitedly, like a kid about to open a present.

"Tell us how to reach the First Gate.

Right now.

Or we will kill you.

Right now."

"You're bluffing,"

I heard myself say.

But I didn't think he was.

Not at all.

"No, Wade.

I'm not.

Think about it.

With everything else that's going on in the world, do you think anyone will care about an explosion in some ghetto-trash rat warren in Oklahoma City?

They'll assume it was a drug-lab accident.

Or maybe a domestic terrorist cell trying to build a homemade bomb.

Either way, it will just mean there are a few hundred less human cockroaches out there collecting food vouchers and using up precious oxygen.

No one will care.

And the authorities won't even blink."

He was right, and I knew it.

I tried to stall for a few seconds so I could figure out what to do.

"You'd kill me?"

I said.

"To win a videogame contest?"

"Don't pretend to be nave, Wade,"

Sorrento said.

"There are billions of dollars at stake here, along with control of one of the world's most profitable corporations, and of the OASIS itself.

This is much more than a videogame contest.

It always has been."

He leaned forward.

"But you can still come out a winner here, kid.

If you help us, we'll still give you the five million.

You can retire at age eighteen and spend the rest of your days living like royalty.

Or you can die in the next few seconds.

It's your call.

But ask yourself this question-if your mother were still alive, what would she want you to do?"

That last question would really have pissed me off if I hadn't been so scared.

"What's to stop you from killing me after I give you what you want?"

I asked.

"Regardless of what you may think, we don't want to have to kill anyone unless it's absolutely necessary.

Besides, there are two more gates, right?"

He shrugged.

"We might need your help to figure those out too.

Personally, I doubt it.

But my superiors feel differently.

Regardless, you don't really have a choice at this point, do you?"

He lowered his voice, as if he were about to share a secret.

"So here's what's going to happen next.

You're going to give me step-by-step instructions on how to obtain the Copper Key and clear the First Gate.

And you're going to stay logged into this chatlink session while we verify everything you tell us.

Log out before I say it's OK, and your whole world goes boom.

Understand?

Now start talking."

I considered giving them what they wanted.

I really did.

But I thought it through, and I couldn't come up with a single good reason why they would let me live, even if I helped them clear the First Gate.

The only move that made sense was to kill me and take me out of the running.

They sure as hell weren't going to give me five million dollars, or leave me alive to tell the media how IOI had blackmailed me.

Especially if there really was a remote-controlled bomb planted in my trailer to serve as evidence.

No.

The way I saw it, there were really only two possibilities: Either they were bluffing or they were going to kill me, whether I helped them or not.

I made my decision and summoned my courage.

"Sorrento,"

I said, trying to hide the fear in my voice, "I want you and your bosses to know something.

You're never going to find Halliday's egg.

You know why?

Because he was smarter than all of you put together.

It doesn't matter how much money you have or who you try to blackmail.

You're going to lose."

I tapped my Log-out icon, and my avatar began to dematerialize in front of him.

He didn't seem surprised.

He just looked at me sadly and shook his head.

"Stupid move, kid,"

he said, just before my visor went black.

I sat there in the darkness of my hideout, wincing and waiting for the detonation.

But a full minute passed and nothing happened.

I slid my visor up and pulled off my gloves with shaking hands.

As my eyes began to adjust to the darkness, I let out a tentative sigh of relief.

It had been a bluff after all.

Sorrento had been playing an elaborate mind game with me.

An effective one too.

As I was gulping down a bottle of water, I realized that I should log back in and warn Aech and Art3mis.

The Sixers would go after them next.

I was pulling my gloves back on when I heard the explosion.

I felt the shock wave a split second after I heard the detonation and instinctively dropped to the floor of my hideout with my arms wrapped over my head.

In the distance, I could hear the sound of rending metal as several trailer stacks began to collapse, ripping free of their scaffolding and crashing against one another like massive dominoes.

These horrific sounds continued for what seemed like a very long time.

Then it was silent again.

I eventually overcame my paralysis and opened the rear door of the van.

In a nightmare-like daze, I made my way to the outskirts of the junk pile, and from there, I could see a giant pillar of smoke and flames rising from the opposite end of the stacks.

I followed the stream of people already running in that direction, along the northern perimeter of the stacks.

The stack containing my aunt's trailer had collapsed into a fiery, smoking ruin, along with all of the stacks adjacent to it.

There was nothing there now but a massive pile of twisted, flaming metal.

I kept my distance, but a large crowd of people had already gathered up ahead of me, standing as close to the blaze as they dared.

No one bothered trying to enter the wreckage to look for survivors.

It was obvious there weren't going to be any.

An ancient propane tank attached to one of the crushed trailers detonated in a small explosion, causing the crowd to scatter and dive for cover.

Several more tanks detonated in rapid succession.

After that, the onlookers moved much farther back and kept their distance.

The residents who lived in the nearby stacks knew that if the fire spread, they were in big trouble.

So a lot of people were already scrambling to fight the blaze, using garden hoses, buckets, empty Big Gulp cups, and whatever else they could find.

Before long, the flames were contained and the fire began to die out.

As I watched in silence, I could already hear the people around me murmuring, saying that it was probably another meth-lab accident, or that some idiot must have been trying to build a homemade bomb.

Just as Sorrento had predicted.

That thought snapped me out of my daze.

What was I thinking?

The Sixers had just tried to kill me.

They probably still had agents lurking here in the stacks, checking to make sure I was dead.

And like a total idiot I was standing right out in the open.

I faded away from the crowd and hurried back to my hideout, being careful not to run, constantly glancing over my shoulder to make sure I wasn't being followed.

Once I was back inside the van, I slammed and locked the door, then curled into a quivering ball in the corner.

I stayed like that for a long time.

Eventually, the shock began to wear off, and the reality of what had just happened started to sink in.

My aunt Alice and her boyfriend Rick were dead, along with everyone who had lived in our trailer, and in the trailers below and around it.

Including sweet old Mrs.

Gilmore.

And if I had been at home, I would be dead now too.

I was jacked up on adrenaline, unsure of what to do next, overcome by a paralyzing mixture of fear and rage.

I thought about logging into the OASIS to call the police, but then considered how they would react when I told them my story.

They'd think I was a raving nut job.

And if I called the media, they'd react the same way.

There was no way anyone would believe my story.

Not unless I revealed that I was Parzival, and maybe not even then.

I didn't have a shred of proof against Sorrento and the Sixers.

All traces of the bomb they'd planted were probably melting into slag right now.

Revealing my identity to the world so that I could accuse one of the world's most powerful corporations of blackmail and murder didn't seem like the smartest move.

No one would believe me.

I could barely believe it myself.

IOI had actually tried to kill me.

To prevent me from winning a videogame contest.

It was insane.

I seemed to be safe in my hideout for the moment, but I knew I couldn't stay in the stacks much longer.

When the Sixers found out I was still alive, they would come back here looking for me.

I needed to get the hell out of Dodge.

But I couldn't do that until I had some money, and my first endorsement checks wouldn't be deposited for another day or two.

I would just have to lie low until then.

But right now, I needed to talk to Aech, to warn him that he was next on the Sixers' hit list.

I was also desperate to see a friendly face.

I grabbed my OASIS console and powered it on, then pulled on my visor and gloves.

As I logged in, my avatar reappeared on Ludus, on the hilltop where I'd been sitting prior to my chat-room session with Sorrento.

The moment my audio kicked in, I heard the earsplitting roar of engines coming from somewhere directly overheard.

I stepped out from under the tree and looked up.

I saw a squadron of Sixer gunships flying in formation, zooming south at low altitude, their sensors scanning the surface as they went.

I was about to duck back under the tree, out of sight, when I remembered that all of Ludus was a no-PvP zone.

The Sixers couldn't harm me here.

Even so, my nerves were still on edge.

I continued to scan the sky and quickly spotted two more Sixer gunship squadrons off near the eastern horizon.

A moment later, several more squadrons dropped in from orbit to the north and west.

It looked like an alien invasion.

An icon flashed on my display, informing me that I had a new text message from Aech: Where the hell are you?

Call me ASAFP!

I tapped his name on my contact list, and he answered on the first ring.

His avatar's face appeared in my vidfeed window.

He was wearing a grim expression.

"Did you hear the news?"

he asked.

"What news?"

"The Sixers are on Ludus.

Thousands of them.

More arriving every minute.

They're searching the planet, looking for the tomb."

"Yeah.

I'm on Ludus right now.

Sixer gunships everywhere."

Aech scowled.

"When I find I-r0k, I'm going to kill him.

Slowly.

Then, when he creates a new avatar, I'm going to hunt him down and kill him again.

If that moron had kept his mouth shut, the Sixers never would have thought to look here."

"Yeah.

His forum posts were what tipped them off.

Sorrento said so himself."

"Sorrento?

As in Nolan Sorrento?"

I told him everything that had happened in the past few hours.

"They blew up your house?"

"Actually, it was a trailer,"

I said.

"In a trailer park.

They killed a lot of people here, Aech.

It's probably already on the newsfeeds."

I took a deep breath.

"I'm freaking out.

I'm scared."

"I don't blame you,"

he said.

"Thank God you weren't home when it happened...."

I nodded.

"I almost never log in from home.

Luckily, the Sixers didn't know that."

"What about your family?"

"It was my aunt's place.

She's dead, I think.

We ...

we weren't very close."

This was a huge understatement, of course.

My aunt Alice had never shown me much kindness, but she still hadn't deserved to die.

But most of the wrenching guilt I now felt had to do with Mrs.

Gilmore, and the knowledge that my actions had gotten her killed.

She was one of the sweetest people I'd ever known.

I realized that I was sobbing.

I muted my audio so Aech wouldn't hear, then took several deep breaths until I got myself under control again.

"I can't believe this!"

Aech growled.

"Those evil pricks.

They're gonna pay, Z.

Count on it.

We will make them pay for this."

I couldn't see how, but I didn't argue.

I knew he was just trying to make me feel better.

"Where are you right now?"

Aech asked.

"Do you need help?

Like, a place to stay or something?

I can wire you some money if you need it."

"No, I'm OK,"

I said.

"But thanks, man.

I really appreciate the offer."

"De nada, amigo."

"Listen, did the Sixers send you the same e-mail they sent me?"

"Yeah.

Thousands of them.

But I decided it was best to ignore them."

I frowned.

"I wish I'd been smart enough to do that."

"Dude, you had no way of knowing they were gonna try and kill you!

Besides, they already had your home address.

If you'd ignored their e-mails, they probably would have set off that bomb anyway."

"Listen, Aech ...

Sorrento said that your school records contained a fake home address, and that they don't know where to find you.

But he might have been lying.

You should leave home.

Go somewhere safe.

As soon as possible."

"Don't worry about me, Z.

I stay mobile.

Those bastards will never find me."

"If you say so,"

I replied, wondering what exactly he meant.

"But I need to warn Art3mis, too.

And Daito and Shoto, if I can reach them.

The Sixers are probably doing everything they can to learn their identities too."

"That gives me an idea,"

he said.

"We should invite all three of them to meet us in the Basement later tonight.

Say around midnight?

A private chat-room session.

Just the five of us."

My mood brightened at the prospect of seeing Art3mis again.

"Do you think they'll all agree to come?"

"Yeah, if we let them know their lives depend on it."

He smirked.

"And we're going to have the world's top five gunters together in one chat room.

Who's gonna sit that out?"

I sent Art3mis a short message, asking her to meet us in Aech's private chat room at midnight.

She replied just a few minutes later, promising to be there.

Aech told me he'd managed to reach Daito and Shoto, and they had both also agreed to attend.

The meeting was set.

I didn't feel like being alone, so I logged into the Basement about an hour early.

Aech was already there, surfing the newsfeeds on the ancient RCA television.

Without saying a word, he got up and gave me a hug.

Even though I couldn't actually feel it, I found it surprisingly comforting.

Then we both sat down and watched the news coverage together while we waited for the others to arrive.

Every channel was airing OASIS footage showing the hordes of Sixer spacecraft and troops that were currently arriving on Ludus.

It was easy for everyone to guess why they were there, and so now every gunter in the simulation was also headed for Ludus.

Transport terminals all over the planet were jammed with incoming avatars.

"So much for keeping the tomb's location a secret,"

I said, shaking my head.

"It was bound to leak out eventually,"

Aech said, shutting off the TV.

"I just didn't think it would happen this fast."

We both heard an entrance alert chime as Art3mis materialized at the top of the staircase.

She was wearing the same outfit she'd had on the night we met.

She waved to me as she descended the steps.

I waved back, then made introductions.

"Aech, meet Art3mis.

Art3mis, this is my best friend, Aech."

"Pleasure to meet you,"

Art3mis said, extending her right hand.

Aech shook it.

"Likewise."

He flashed his Cheshire grin.

"Thanks for coming."

"Are you kidding?

How could I miss it?

The very first meeting of the High Five."

"The High Five?"

I said.

"Yeah,"

Aech said.

"That's what they're calling us on all of the message boards now.

We hold the top five high-score slots on the Scoreboard.

So we're the High Five."

"Right,"

I said.

"At least for the time being."

Art3mis grinned at that, then turned and began to wander around the Basement, admiring the '80s decor.

"Aech, this is, by far, the coolest chat room I've ever seen."

"Thank you."

He bowed his head.

"Kind of you to say."

She stopped to browse through the shelf of role-playing game supplements.

"You've re-created Morrow's basement perfectly.

Every last detail.

I want to live here."

"You've got a permanent spot on the guest list.

Log in and hang out anytime."

"Really?"

she said, clearly delighted.

"Thank you!

I will.

You're the man, Aech."

"Yes,"

he said, smiling.

"It's true.

I am."

They really seemed to be hitting it off, and it was making me crazy jealous.

I didn't want Art3mis to like Aech, or vice versa.

I wanted her all to myself.

Daito and Shoto logged in a moment later, appearing simultaneously at the top of the basement staircase.

Daito was the taller of the two, and appeared to be in his late teens.

Shoto was a foot shorter and looked much younger.

Maybe about thirteen.

Both avatars looked Japanese, and they bore a striking resemblance to one another, like snapshots of the same young man taken five years apart.

They wore matching suits of traditional samurai armor, and each had both a short wakizashi and a longer katana strapped to his belt.

"Greetings,"

the taller samurai said.

"I am Daito.

And this is my little brother, Shoto.

Thank you for the invitation.

We are honored to meet all three of you."

They bowed in unison.

Aech and Art3mis returned the bow, and I quickly followed suit.

As we each introduced ourselves, Daito and Shoto bowed to us once again, and once again we each returned the gesture.

"All right,"

Aech said, once all the bowing had ended.

"Let's get this party started.

I'm sure you've all seen the news.

The Sixers are swarming all over Ludus.

Thousands of them.

They're conducting a systematic search of the entire surface of the planet.

Even if they don't know exactly what they're looking for, it still won't be long before they find the entrance to the tomb-"

"Actually,"

Art3mis interrupted, "they already found it.

Over thirty minutes ago."

We all turned to look at her.

"That hasn't been reported on the newsfeeds yet,"

Daito said.

"Are you sure?"

She nodded.

"Afraid so.

When I heard about the Sixers this morning, I decided to hide an uplink camera in some trees near the tomb entrance, to keep an eye on the area."

She opened a vidfeed window in the air in front of her and spun it around so the rest of us could see.

It showed a wide shot of the flat- topped hill and the clearing around it, looking down from a spot in one of the trees high above.

From this angle, it was easy to see that the large black stones on top of the hill were arranged to look like a human skull.

We could also see that the entire area was crawling with Sixers, and more seemed to be arriving every second.

But the most disturbing thing we saw on the vidfeed was the large transparent dome of energy that now covered the entire hill.

"Son of a bitch,"

Aech said.

"Is that what I think it is?"

Art3mis nodded.

"A force field.

The Sixers installed it just after the first of them arrived.

So ..."

"So from here on out,"

Daito said, "any gunter who finds the tomb won't be able to get inside.

Not unless they can somehow get through that force field."

"Actually, they've put up two force fields,"

Art3mis said.

"A small field with a larger field over it.

They lower them in sequence, whenever they want to let more Sixers enter the tomb.

Like an air lock."

She pointed to the window.

"Watch.

They're doing it now."

A squadron of Sixers marched down the loading ramp of a gunship parked nearby.

They were all lugging equipment containers.

As they approached the outer force field, it vanished, revealing a smaller domed field inside the first.

As soon as the squadron reached the wall of the inner force field, the outer field reappeared.

A second later, the inner force field was dropped, allowing the Sixers to enter the tomb.

There was a long silence while we all contemplated this new development.

"I suppose it could be worse,"

Aech said finally.

"If the tomb were in a PvP zone, those assholes would already have laser cannons and robot sentries mounted everywhere, to vaporize anyone who approached the area."

He was right.

Since Ludus was a safe zone, the Sixers couldn't harm gunters who approached the tomb.

But there was nothing to stop them from erecting a force field to keep them out.

So that was exactly what they'd done.

"The Sixers have obviously been planning for this moment for some time now,"

Art3mis said, closing her vidfeed window.

"They won't be able to keep everyone out for very long,"

Aech said.

"When the clans find out about this, it'll be all-out war.

There will be thousands of gunters attacking that force field with everything they've got.

RPGs.

Fireballs.

Cluster bombs.

Nukes.

It's gonna get ugly.

They'll turn that forest into a wasteland."

"Yeah, but in the meantime, Sixer avatars will be farming the Copper Key and then filing their avatars through the First Gate, one after another, in a freakin' conga line."

"But how can they do this?"

Shoto asked, his young voice brimming with rage.

He looked to his brother.

"It's not fair.

They're not playing fair."

"They don't have to.

There are no laws in the OASIS, little brother,"

Daito said.

"The Sixers can do whatever they please.

They won't stop until someone stops them."

"The Sixers have no honor,"

Shoto said, scowling.

"You guys don't know the half of it,"

Aech said.

"That's why Parzival and I asked you all here."

He turned to me.

"Z, do you want to tell them what happened?"

I nodded and turned to the others.

First, I told them about the e-mail I'd received from IOI.

They'd all received the same invitation, but had wisely ignored it.

Then I related the details of my chat-room session with Sorrento, doing my best not to leave anything out.

Finally, I told them how our conversation had ended-with a bomb detonating at my home address.

By the time I'd finished, their avatars all wore looks of stunned disbelief.

"Jesus,"

Art3mis whispered.

"No joke?

They tried to kill you?"

"Yeah.

They would have succeeded, too, if I'd been at home.

I was just lucky."

"Now you all know how far the Sixers are willing to go to stop us from beating them to the egg,"

Aech said.

"If they're able to locate any one of us, we're dead meat."

I nodded.

"So you should all take precautions to protect yourselves and your identities,"

I said.

"If you haven't already."

They all nodded.

There was another long silence.

"There's still one thing I don't understand,"

Art3mis said a moment later.

"How did the Sixers know to look for the tomb on Ludus?

Did someone tip them off?"

She glanced around at each of us, but there was no hint of accusation in her voice.

"They must have seen the rumors about Parzival and Aech that were posted on all of the gunter message boards,"

Shoto said.

"That's how we knew to look there."

Daito winced, then punched his little brother in the shoulder.

"Didn't I tell you to keep quiet, blabbermouth?"

he hissed.

Shoto looked sheepish and clammed up.

"What rumors?"

Art3mis asked.

She looked at me.

"What's he talking about?

I haven't had time to check the boards in a few days."

"Several posts were made by gunters who claimed to know Parzival and Aech, saying they were both students on Ludus."

He turned to Aech and me.

"My brother and I have spent the past two years searching for the Tomb of Horrors.

We've scoured dozens of worlds looking for it.

But we never thought to look on Ludus.

Not until we heard that you attended school there."

"It never occurred to me that attending school on Ludus was something I needed to keep a secret,"

I said.

"So I didn't."

"Yeah, and it's lucky for us that you didn't,"

Aech said.

He turned to the others.

"Parzival unintentionally tipped me off about the tomb's location, too.

I never thought to look for it on Ludus, either, until his name appeared on the Scoreboard."

Daito nudged his younger brother, and they both faced me and bowed.

"You were the first to find the tomb's hiding place, so we owe you our gratitude for leading us to it."

I returned their bow.

"Thanks, guys.

But actually, Art3mis here found it first.

Totally on her own.

A month before I did."

"Yeah, for all the good it did me,"

Art3mis said.

"I couldn't defeat the lich at Joust.

I'd been at it for weeks when this punk showed up and did it on his first try."

She explained how we met, and how she finally managed to beat the king the following day, right after the server reset at midnight.

"I have Aech here to thank for my jousting prowess,"

I said.

"We used to play all the time, here in the Basement.

That's the only reason I beat the king on my first attempt."

"Ditto,"

Aech said.

He stretched out his hand and we bumped fists.

Daito and Shoto both smiled.

"It was the same with us,"

Daito said.

"My brother and I have been playing Joust against one another for years, because the game was mentioned in Anorak's Almanac."

"Great,"

Art3mis said, throwing up her hands.

"Good for you guys.

You were all prepared in advance.

I'm so happy for you.

Bravo."

She gave us all a sarcastic golf clap, which made everyone laugh.

"Now, can we adjourn the Mutual Admiration Society and get back to the topic at hand?"

"Sure,"

Aech said, smiling.

"What was the topic at hand?"

"The Sixers?"

Art3mis offered.

"Right!

Of course!"

Aech rubbed the back of his neck while biting his lower lip, something he always did when he was trying to gather his thoughts.

"You said they found the tomb less than an hour ago, right?

So any minute now, they'll reach the throne room and face off against the lich.

But what do you think happens when multiple avatars enter the burial chamber at the same time?"

I turned to Daito and Shoto.

"Your names appeared on the Scoreboard on the same day, just a few minutes apart.

So you entered the throne room together, didn't you?"

Daito nodded.

"Yes,"

he said.

"And when we stepped on the dais, two copies of the king appeared, one for each of us to play."

"Great,"

Art3mis said.

"So it might be possible for hundreds of Sixers to joust for the Copper Key at the same time.

Or even thousands."

"Yeah,"

Shoto said.

"But to get the key, each Sixer has to beat the lich at Joust, which we all know isn't easy."

"The Sixers are using hacked immersion rigs,"

I said.

"Sorrento was boasting about it to me.

They've got it set up so that different users can control the actions of every one of their avatars.

So they can just have their best Joust players take control of each Sixer avatar during the match against Acererak.

One after the other."

"Cheating bastards,"

Aech repeated.

"The Sixers have no honor,"

Daito said, shaking his head.

"Yeah,"

Art3mis said, rolling her eyes.

"We've established that."

"It gets worse,"

I said.

"Every Sixer has a support team made up of Halliday scholars, videogame experts, and cryptologists who are there to help them beat every challenge and solve every puzzle they encounter.

Playing through the WarGames simulation will be a piece of cake for them.

Someone will just feed them the dialogue."

"Unbelievable,"

Aech muttered.

"How are we supposed to compete with that?"

"We can't,"

Art3mis said.

"Once they have the Copper Key, they'll probably locate the First Gate just as quickly as we all did.

It won't take them very long to catch up with us.

And once they have the riddle about the Jade Key, they'll have their eggheads working around the clock to decipher it."

"If they find the Jade Key's hiding place before we do, they'll barricade it, too,"

I said.

"And then the five of us will be in the same boat everyone else is in right now."

Art3mis nodded.

Aech kicked the coffee table in frustration.

"This isn't even remotely fair,"

he said.

"The Sixers have a huge advantage over all of us.

They've got an endless supply of money, weapons, vehicles, and avatars.

There are thousands of them, all working together."

"Right,"

I said.

"And each of us is on our own.

Well, except for you two."

I nodded at Daito and Shoto.

"But you know what I mean.

They've got us outnumbered and outgunned, and that isn't going to change anytime soon."

"What are you suggesting?"

Daito asked.

He suddenly sounded uneasy.

"I'm not suggesting anything,"

I said.

"I'm just stating the facts, as I see them."

"Good,"

Daito replied.

"Because it sounded like you were about to propose some sort of alliance between the five of us."

Aech studied him carefully.

"So?

Would that be such a terrible idea?"

"Yes, it would,"

Daito said curtly.

"My brother and I hunt alone.

We don't want or need your help."

"Oh really?"

Aech said.

"A second ago, you admitted needing Parzival's help to find the Tomb of Horrors."

Daito's eyes narrowed.

"We would have found it on our own eventually."

"Right,"

Aech said.

"It probably would have only taken you another five years."

"Come on, Aech,"

I said, stepping between them.

"This isn't helping."

Aech and Daito glared at each other in silence, while Shoto stared up at his brother uncertainly.

Art3mis just stood back and watched, looking somewhat amused.

"We didn't come here to be insulted,"

Daito said finally.

"We're leaving."

"Hold on, Daito,"

I said.

"Just wait a second, will you?

Let's just talk this out.

We shouldn't part as enemies.

We're all on the same side here."

"No,"

Daito said.

"We're not.

You're all strangers to us.

For all we know, any one of you could be a Sixer spy."

Art3mis laughed out loud at that, then covered her mouth.

Daito ignored her.

"This is pointless,"

he said.

"Only one person can be the first to find the egg and win the prize,"

he said.

"And that person will be either me or my brother."

And with that, Daito and Shoto both abruptly logged out.

"That went well,"

Art3mis said, once their avatars had vanished.

I nodded.

"Yeah, real smooth, Aech.

Way to build bridges."

"What did I do?"

he said defensively.

"Daito was being a complete asshole!

Besides, it's not like we were asking him to team up, anyway.

I'm an avowed solo.

And so are you.

And Art3mis here looks like the lone-wolf type too."

"Guilty as charged,"

she said, grinning.

"But even so, there is an argument to be made for forming an alliance against the Sixers."

"Maybe,"

Aech said.

"But think about it.

If you find the Jade Key before either of us do, are you going to be generous and tell us where it is?"

Art3mis smirked.

"Of course not."

"Me neither,"

Aech said.

"So there's no point in discussing an alliance."

Art3mis shrugged.

"Well, then it looks like the meeting is over.

I should probably get going."

She winked at me.

"The clock is ticking.

Right, boys?"

"Tick tock,"

I said.

"Good luck, fellas."

She gave us both a wave.

"See ya around."

"See ya,"

we both answered in unison.

I watched her avatar slowly disappear, then turned to find Aech smiling at me.

"What are you grinning about?"

I asked.

"You've got a crush on her, don't you?"

"What?

On Art3mis?

No-"

"Don't deny it, Z.

You were making googly eyes at her the whole time she was here."

He did his impression of this, clasping both hands to his chest and batting his eyelashes like a silent film star.

"I recorded the whole chat session.

Do you want me to play it back for you, so you can see how silly you looked?"

"Stop being a dick."

"It's understandable, man,"

Aech said.

"That girl is super cute."

"So, have you had any luck with the new riddle?"

I said, deliberately changing the subject.

"That quatrain about the Jade Key?"

"Quatrain?"

"

'A poem or stanza with four lines and an alternating rhyme scheme,' "

I recited.

"It's called a quatrain."

Aech rolled his eyes.

"You're too much, man."

"What?

That's the proper term for it, asshead!"

"It's just a riddle, dude.

And no.

I haven't had any luck figuring it out yet."

"Me neither,"

I said.

"So we probably shouldn't be standing around jabbering at each other.

Time to put our noses to the grindstone."

"I concur,"

he said.

"But-"

Just then, a stack of comic books on the other side of the room slid off the end table where they were piled and crashed to the floor, as if something had knocked them over.

Aech and I both jumped, then exchanged confused looks.

"What the hell was that?"

I said.

"I don't know."

Aech walked over and examined the scattered comics.

"Maybe a software glitch or something?"

"I've never seen a chat-room glitch like that,"

I said, scanning the empty room.

"Could someone else be in here?

An invisible avatar, eavesdropping on us?"

Aech rolled his eyes.

"No way, Z,"

he said.

"You're getting way too paranoid.

This is an encrypted private chat room.

No one can enter without my permission.

You know that."

"Right,"

I said, still freaked out.

"Relax.

It was a glitch."

He rested a hand on my shoulder.

"Listen.

Let me know if you change your mind about needing a loan.

Or a place to crash.

OK?"

"I'll be all right,"

I said.

"But thanks, amigo."

We bumped fists again, like the Wonder Twins activating their powers.

"I'll catch you later.

Good luck, Z."

"Same to you, Aech."

A few hours later, the remaining slots on the Scoreboard began to fill up, one after another, in rapid succession.

Not with avatar names, but with IOI employee numbers.

Each would appear with a score of 5,000 points (which now appeared to be the fixed value for obtaining the Copper Key); then the score would jump by another 100,000 points a few hours later, once that Sixer had cleared the First Gate.

By the end of the day, the Scoreboard looked like this: HIGH SCORES: 1.

Parzival 110,000 2.

Art3mis 109,000 3.

Aech 108,000 4.

Daito 107,000 5.

Shoto 106,000 6.

IOI-655321 105,000 7.

IOI-643187 105,000 8.

IOI-621671 105,000 9.

IOI-678324 105,000 10.

IOI-637330 105,000 I recognized the first Sixer employee number to appear, because I'd seen it printed on Sorrento's uniform.

He'd probably insisted that his avatar be the first to obtain the Copper Key and clear the gate.

But I had a hard time believing he'd done it on his own.

There was no way he was that good at Joust.

Or that he knew WarGames by heart.

But I now knew that he didn't have to be.

When he reached a challenge he couldn't handle, like winning at Joust, he could just hand control of his avatar off to one of his underlings.

And during the WarGames challenge he'd probably just had someone feeding him all of the dialogue via his hacked immersion rig.

Once the remaining empty slots were filled, the Scoreboard began to grow in length, to display rankings beyond tenth place.

Before long, twenty avatars were listed on the Scoreboard.

Then thirty.

Over the next twenty-four hours, over sixty Sixer avatars cleared the First Gate.

Meanwhile, Ludus had become the most popular destination in the OASIS.

Transport terminals all over the planet were spitting out a steady stream of gunters who then swarmed across the globe, creating chaos and disrupting classes on every school campus.

The OASIS Public School Board saw the writing on the wall, and the decision was quickly made to evacuate Ludus and relocate all of its schools to a new location.

An identical copy of the planet, Ludus II, was created in the same sector, a short distance away from the original.

All students were given a day off from school while a backup copy of the planet's original source code was copied over to the new site (minus the Tomb of Horrors code Halliday had secretly added to it at some point).

Classes resumed on Ludus II the following day, and Ludus was left for the Sixers and gunters to fight over.

News spread quickly that the Sixers were encamped around a small flat- topped hill at the center of a remote forest.

The tomb's exact location appeared on the message boards that evening, along with screenshots showing the force field the Sixers had erected to keep everyone else out.

These screenshots also clearly showed the skull pattern of the stones on the hilltop.

In a matter of hours, the connection to the Tomb of Horrors D&D module was posted to every single gunter message board.

Then it hit the newsfeeds.

All of the large gunter clans immediately banded together to launch a full- scale assault on the Sixers' force field, trying everything they could think of to bring it down or circumvent it.

The Sixers had installed teleportation disruptors, which prevented anyone from transporting inside the force field via technological means.

They had also stationed a team of high-level wizards around the tomb.

These magic users cast spells around the clock, keeping the entire area encased in a temporary null-magic zone.

This prevented the force fields from being bypassed by any magical means.

The clans began to bombard the outer force field with rockets, missiles, nukes, and harsh language.

They laid siege to the tomb all night, but the following morning, both force fields remained intact.

In desperation, the clans decided to break out the heavy artillery.

They pooled their resources and purchased two very expensive, very powerful antimatter bombs on eBay.

They detonated both of them in sequence, just a few seconds apart.

The first bomb took down the outer shield, and the second bomb finished the job.

The moment the second force field went down, thousands of gunters (all unharmed by the bomb blasts, due to the no-PvP zone) swarmed into the tomb and clogged the corridors of the dungeon below.

Soon, thousands of gunters (and Sixers) had crammed into the burial chamber, all ready to challenge the lich king to a game of Joust.

Multiple copies of the king appeared, one for every avatar who set foot on the dais.

Ninety-five percent of the gunters who challenged him lost and were then killed.

But a few gunters were successful, and at the bottom of the Scoreboard, listed after the High Five and the dozens of IOI employee numbers, new avatar names began to appear.

Within a few days, the list of avatars on the Scoreboard was over a hundred names long.

Now that the area was full of gunters, it became impossible for the Sixers to put their force field back in operation.

Gunters were mobbing them and destroying their ships and equipment on sight.

So the Sixers gave up on their barricade, but they continued to send avatars into the Tomb of Horrors to farm copies of the Copper Key.

No one could do anything to stop them.

The day after the explosion in the stacks, there was a brief story about it on one of the local newsfeeds.

They showed a video clip of volunteers sifting through the wreckage for human remains.

What they did find couldn't be identified.

It seemed that the Sixers had also planted a large amount of drug- manufacturing equipment and chemicals at the scene, to make it look like a meth lab in one of the trailers had exploded.

It worked like a charm.

The cops didn't bother to investigate any further.

The stacks were so dense around the pile of crushed and charred trailers that it was too dangerous to try to clear them out with one of the old construction cranes.

They just left the wreckage where it was, to slowly rust into the earth.

As soon as the first endorsement payment arrived in my account, I bought a one-way bus ticket to Columbus, Ohio, set to depart at eight the following morning.

I paid extra for a first-class seat, which came with a comfier chair and a high-bandwidth uplink jack.

I planned to spend most of the long ride east logged into the OASIS.

Once my trip was booked, I inventoried everything in my hideout and packed the items I wanted to take with me into an old rucksack.

My school-issued OASIS console, visor, and gloves.

My dog-eared printout of Anorak's Almanac.

My grail diary.

Some clothes.

My laptop.

Everything else I left behind.

When it got dark, I climbed out of the van, locked it, and hurled the keys off into the junk pile.

Then I hoisted the rucksack and walked out of the stacks for the last time.

I didn't look back.

I kept to busy streets and managed to avoid getting mugged on the way to the bus terminal.

A battered customer-service kiosk stood just inside the door, and after a quick retinal scan it spat out my ticket.

I sat by the gate, reading my copy of the Almanac, until it was time to board the bus.

It was a double-decker, with armor plating, bulletproof windows, and solar panels on the roof.

A rolling fortress.

I had a window seat, two rows behind the driver, who was encased in a bulletproof Plexiglas box.

A team of six heavily armed guards rode on the bus's upper deck, to protect the vehicle and its passengers in the event of a hijacking by road agents or scavengers-a distinct possibility once we ventured out into the lawless badlands that now existed outside of the safety of large cities.

Every single seat on the bus was occupied.

Most of the passengers put on their visors the moment they sat down.

I left mine off for a while, though.

Long enough to watch the city of my birth recede from view on the road behind us as we rolled through the sea of wind turbines that surrounded it.

The bus's electric motor had a top speed of about forty miles an hour, but due to the deteriorating interstate highway system and the countless stops the bus had to make at charging stations along the way, it took several days for me to reach my destination.

I spent nearly all of that time logged into the OASIS, preparing to start my new life.

The first order of business was to create a new identity.

This wasn't that difficult, now that I had some money.

In the OASIS, you could buy almost any kind of information if you knew where to look and who to ask, and if you didn't mind breaking the law.

There were plenty of desperate and corrupt people working for the government (and for every major corporation), and these people often sold information on the OASIS black market.

My new status as a world-famous gunter gave me all kinds of underworld credibility, which helped me get access to a highly exclusive illegal data-auction site known as the L33t Hax0rz Warezhaus, and for a shockingly small amount of money, I was able to purchase a series of access procedures and passwords for the USCR (United States Citizen Registry) database.

Using these, I was able to log into the database and access my existing citizen profile, which had been created when I enrolled for school.

I deleted my fingerprints and retinal patterns, then replaced them with those of someone deceased (my father).

Then I copied my own fingerprints and retinal patterns into a completely new identity profile that I'd created, under the name Bryce Lynch.

I made Bryce twenty-two years old and gave him a brand-new Social Security number, an immaculate credit rating, and a bachelor's degree in Computer Science.

When I wanted to become my old self again, all I had to do was delete the Lynch identity and copy my prints and retinal patterns back over to my original file.

Once my new identity was set up, I began searching the Columbus classifieds for a suitable apartment and found a relatively inexpensive room in an old high- rise hotel, a relic from the days when people physically traveled for business and pleasure.

The rooms had all been converted into one-room efficiency apartments, and each unit had been modified to meet the very specific needs of a full-time gunter.

It had everything I wanted.

Low rent, a high-end security system, and steady, reliable access to as much electricity as I could afford.

Most important, it offered a direct fiber-optic connection to the main OASIS server vault, which was located just a few miles away.

This was the fastest and most secure type of Internet connection available, and since it wasn't provided by IOI or one of its subsidiaries, I wouldn't have to be paranoid about them monitoring my connection or trying to trace my location.

I would be safe.

I spoke with a rental agent in a chat room, and he showed me around a virtual mock-up of my new digs.

The place looked perfect.

I rented the room under my new name and paid six months' rent up front.

That kept the agent from asking any questions.

Sometimes, during the late hours of the night, as the bus slowly hummed along the crumbling highway, I removed my visor and stared out the window.

I'd never been outside of Oklahoma City before, and I was curious to see what the rest of the country looked like.

But the view was perpetually bleak, and each decaying, overcrowded city we rolled through looked just like the last.

Finally, after it felt like we'd been crawling along the highway for months, the Columbus skyline appeared on the horizon, glittering like Oz at the end of the yellow brick road.

We arrived around sunset, and already there were more electric lights burning in the city than I'd ever seen at one time.

I'd read that giant solar arrays were positioned throughout the city, along with two heliostat power plants on its outskirts.

They drank in the sun's power all day, stored it, and fed it back out each night.

As we pulled into the Columbus bus terminal, my OASIS connection cut out.

As I pulled off my visor and filed off the bus with the other passengers, the reality of my situation finally began to hit home.

I was now a fugitive, living under an assumed name.

Powerful people were out looking for me.

People who wanted me dead.

As I stepped off the bus, I suddenly felt as though a heavy weight were resting on my chest.

I was having a hard time breathing.

Maybe I was having a panic attack.

I forced myself to take deep breaths and tried to calm down.

All I had to do was to get to my new apartment, set up my rig, and log back into the OASIS.

Then everything would be all right.

I would be back in familiar surroundings.

I would be safe.

I hailed an autocab and entered my new address on the touchscreen.

The synthesized voice of the cab's computer told me the drive would take an estimated thirty-two minutes with the current traffic conditions.

During the ride, I stared out the window at the dark city streets.

I still felt light-headed and anxious.

I kept glancing at the meter to see how much farther we had to go.

Finally, the cab pulled up in front of my new apartment building, a slate-gray monolith on the banks of the Scioto, just at the edge of the Twin Rivers ghetto.

I noticed a discolored outline on the building's faade where the Hilton logo used to be, back when the place had been a hotel.

I thumbed my fare and climbed out of the cab.

Then I took one last look around, inhaled one final breath of fresh air, and carried my bag through the front door and into the lobby.

When I stepped inside the security checkpoint cage, my fingerprints and retinal patterns were scanned, and my new name flashed on the monitor.

A green light lit up and the cage door slid open, allowing me to continue on to the elevators.

My apartment was on the forty-second floor, number 4211.

The security lock mounted outside required another retinal scan.

Then the door slid open and the interior lights switched on.

There was no furniture in the cube-shaped room, and only one window.

I stepped inside, closed the door, and locked it behind me.

Then I made a silent vow not to go outside again until I had completed my quest.

I would abandon the real world altogether until I found the egg.

I'm not crazy about reality, but it's still the only place to get a decent meal.

-Groucho Marx Art3mis: You there?

Parzival: Yes!

Hey!

I can't believe you finally responded to one of my chat requests.

Art3mis: Only to ask you to cut it out.

It's a bad idea for us to start chatting.

Parzival: Why?

I thought we were friends.

Art3mis: You seem like a great guy.

But we're competitors.

Rival gunters.

Sworn enemies.

You know the drill.

Parzival: We don't have to talk about anything related to the Hunt....

Art3mis: Everything is related to the Hunt.

Parzival: Come on.

At least give it at shot.

Let's start over.

Hi, Art3mis!

How have you been?

Art3mis: Fine.

Thanks for asking.

You?

Parzival: Outstanding.

Listen, why are we using this ancient text-only chat interface?

I can host a virtual chat room for us.

Art3mis: I prefer this.

Parzival: Why?

Art3mis: As you may recall, I tend to ramble in real time.

When I have to type out everything I want to say, I come off as less of a flibbertigibbet.

Parzival: I don't think you're a flibbertigibbet.

You're enchanting.

Art3mis: Did you just use the word "enchanting"?

Parzival: What I typed is right there in front of you, isn't it?

Art3mis: That's very sweet.

But you're full of crap.

Parzival: I am totally and completely serious.

Art3mis: So, how's life at the top of the Scoreboard, hotshot?

Sick of being famous yet?

Parzival: I don't feel famous.

Art3mis: Are you kidding?

The whole world is dying to find out who you really are.

You're a rock star, man.

Parzival: You're just as famous as I am.

And if I'm such a rock star, how come the media always portrays me as some unwashed geek who never goes outside?

Art3mis: I take it you saw that SNL skit they did about us?

Parzival: Yes.

Why does everyone assume I'm an antisocial nut job?

Art3mis: You're not antisocial?

Parzival: No!

Maybe.

OK, yes.

But I have excellent personal hygiene.

Art3mis: At least they got your gender correct.

Everyone thinks I'm a man in real life.

Parzival: That's because most gunters are male, and they can't accept the idea that a woman has beaten and/or outsmarted them.

Art3mis: I know.

Neanderthals.

Parzival: So you're telling me, definitively, that you are a female?

IRL?

Art3mis: You should have already figured that out on your own, Clouseau.

Parzival: I did.

I have.

Art3mis: Have you?

Parzival: Yes.

After analyzing the available data, I've concluded that you must be a female.

Art3mis: Why must I?

Parzival: Because I don't want to find out that I've got a crush on some 300 lb.

dude named Chuck who lives in his mother's basement in suburban Detroit.

Art3mis: You've got a crush on me?

Parzival: You should have already figured that out on your own, Clouseau.

Art3mis: What if I were a 300 lb.

gal named Charlene, who lives in her mom's basement in suburban Detroit?

Would you still have a crush on me then?

Parzival: I don't know.

Do you live in your mother's basement?

Art3mis: No.

Parzival: Yeah.

Then I probably still would.

Art3mis: So I'm supposed to believe you're one of those mythical guys who only cares about a woman's personality, and not about the package it comes in?

Parzival: Why is it that you assume I'm a man?

Art3mis: Please.

It's obvious.

I get nothing but boy-vibes coming from you.

Parzival: Boy-vibes?

What, do I use masculine sentence structure or something?

Art3mis: Don't change the subject.

You were saying you have a crush on me?

Parzival: I've had a crush on you since before we even met.

From reading your blog and watching your POV.

I've been cyber-stalking you for years.

Art3mis: But you still don't really know anything about me.

Or my real personality.

Parzival: This is the OASIS.

We exist as nothing but raw personality in here.

Art3mis: I beg to differ.

Everything about our online personas is filtered through our avatars, which allows us to control how we look and sound to others.

The OASIS lets you be whoever you want to be.

That's why everyone is addicted to it.

Parzival: So, IRL, you're nothing like the person I met that night in the tomb?

Art3mis: That was just one side of me.

The side I chose to show you.

Parzival: Well, I liked that side.

And if you showed me your other sides, I'm sure I'd like those, too.

Art3mis: You say that now.

But I know how these things work.

Sooner or later, you'll demand to see a picture of the real me.

Parzival: I'm not the sort who makes demands.

Besides, I'm definitely not going to show you a photo of me.

Art3mis: Why?

Are you butt ugly?

Parzival: You're such a hypocrite!

Art3mis: So?

Answer the question, Claire.

Are you ugly?

Parzival: I must be.

Art3mis: Why?

Parzival: The female of the species has always found me repellent.

Art3mis: I don't find you repellent.

Parzival: Of course not.

That's because you're an obese man named Chuck who likes to chat up ugly young boys online.

Art3mis: So you're a young man?

Parzival: Relatively young.

Art3mis: Relative to what?

Parzival: To a fifty-three-year-old guy like you, Chuck.

Does your mom let you live in that basement rent-free or what?

Art3mis: Is that really what you're picturing?

Parzival: If it were, I wouldn't be chatting with you right now.

Art3mis: So what do you imagine I look like, then?

Parzival: Like your avatar, I suppose.

Except, you know, without the armor, guns, or glowing sword.

Art3mis: You're kidding, right?

That's the first rule of online romances, pal.

No one ever looks anything like their avatar.

Parzival: Are we going to have an online romance?

<crosses fingers> Art3mis: No way, ace.

Sorry.

Parzival: Why not?

Art3mis: No time for love, Dr.

Jones.

My cyber-porn addiction eats up most of my free time.

And searching for the Jade Key takes up the rest.

That's what I should be doing right now, in fact.

Parzival: Yeah.

So should I.

But talking to you is more fun.

Art3mis: How about you?

Parzival: How about me what?

Art3mis: Do you have time for an online romance?

Parzival: I've got time for you.

Art3mis: You're too much.

Parzival: I'm not even laying it on thick yet.

Art3mis: Do you have a job?

Or are you still in high school?

Parzival: High school.

I graduate next week.

Art3mis: You shouldn't reveal stuff like that!

I could be a Sixer spy trying to profile you.

Parzival: The Sixers already profiled me, remember?

They blew up my house.

Well, it was a trailer.

But they blew it up.

Art3mis: I know.

I'm still freaked out about that.

I can only imagine how you feel.

Parzival: Revenge is a dish best served cold.

Art3mis: Bon appetit.

What do you do when you're not hunting?

Parzival: I refuse to answer any more questions until you start reciprocating.

Art3mis: Fine.

Quid pro quo, Dr.

Lecter.

We'll take turns asking questions.

Go ahead.

Parzival: Do you work, or go to school?

Art3mis: College.

Parzival: Studying what?

Art3mis: It's my turn.

What do you do when you're not hunting?

Parzival: Nothing.

Hunting is all I do.

I'm hunting right now, in fact.

Multitasking all over the goddamn place.

Art3mis: Same here.

Parzival: Really?

I'll keep an eye on the Scoreboard then.

Just in case.

Art3mis: You do that, ace.

Parzival: What are you studying?

In college?

Art3mis: Poetry and Creative Writing.

Parzival: That makes sense.

You're a fantastic writer.

Art3mis: Thanks for the compliment.

How old are you?

Parzival: Just turned 18 last month.

You?

Art3mis: Don't you think we're getting a little too personal now?

Parzival: Not even remotely.

Art3mis: 19.

Parzival: Ah.

An older woman.

Hot.

Art3mis: That is, if I am a woman ...

Parzival: Are you a woman?

Art3mis: It's not your turn.

Parzival: Fine.

Art3mis: How well do you know Aech?

Parzival: He's been my best friend for five years.

Now, spill it.

Are you a woman?

And by that I mean are you a human female who has never had a sex-change operation?

Art3mis: That's pretty specific.

Parzival: Answer the question, Claire.

Art3mis: I am, and always have been, a human female.

Have you ever met Aech IRL?

Parzival: No.

Do you have any siblings?

Art3mis: No.

You?

Parzival: Nope.

You got parents?

Art3mis: They died.

The flu.

So I was raised by my grandparents.

You got parentage?

Parzival: No.

Mine are dead too.

Art3mis: It kinda sucks, doesn't it?

Not having your parents around.

Parzival: Yeah.

But a lot of people are worse off than me.

Art3mis: I tell myself that all the time.

So ...

are you and Aech working as a duo?

Parzival: Oh, here we go....

Art3mis: Well?

Are you?

Parzival: No.

He asked me the same thing about you and me, you know.

Because you cleared the First Gate a few hours after I did.

Art3mis: Which reminds me-why did you give me that tip?

About changing sides on the Joust game?

Parzival: I felt like helping you.

Art3mis: Well, you shouldn't make that mistake again.

Because I'm the one who's going to win.

You do realize that, right?

Parzival: Yeah, yeah.

We'll see.

Art3mis: You're not holding up your end of our Q & A, goof.

You're, like, five questions behind.

Parzival: Fine.

What color is your hair?

IRL?

Art3mis: Brunette.

Parzival: Eyes?

Art3mis: Blue.

Parzival: Just like your avatar, eh?

Do you have the same face and body, too?

Art3mis: As far as you know.

Parzival: OK.

What's your favorite movie?

Of all time?

Art3mis: It changes.

Right now?

Probably Highlander.

Parzival: You've got great taste, lady.

Art3mis: I know.

I have a thing for evil bald bad guys.

The Kurgan is too sexy.

Parzival: I'm going to shave my head right now.

And start wearing leather.

Art3mis: Send photos.

Listen, I gotta go in a few minutes, Romeo.

You can ask me one last question.

Then I need to get some sleep.

Parzival: When can we chat again?

Art3mis: After one of us finds the egg.

Parzival: That could take years.

Art3mis: So be it.

Parzival: Can I at least keep e-mailing you?

Art3mis: Not a good idea.

Parzival: You can't stop me from e-mailing you.

Art3mis: Actually, I can.

I can block you on my contact list.

Parzival: You wouldn't do that, though.

Would you?

Art3mis: Not if you don't force me to.

Parzival: Harsh.

Unnecessarily harsh.

Art3mis: Good night, Parzival.

Parzival: Farewell, Art3mis.

Sweet dreams.

chatlog ends.

2.27.204502:51:38 OST I started e-mailing her.

At first I showed restraint and only wrote her once a week.

To my surprise, she never failed to respond.

Usually it was with just a single sentence, saying she was too busy to reply.

But her replies eventually got longer and we began to correspond.

A few times a week at first.

Then, as our e- mails grew longer and more personal, we started writing each other at least once a day.

Sometimes more.

Whenever an e-mail from her arrived in my inbox, I dropped everything to read it.

Before long, we were meeting in private chat-room sessions at least once a day.

We played vintage board games, watched movies, and listened to music.

We talked for hours.

Long, rambling conversations about everything under the sun.

Spending time with her was intoxicating.

We seemed to have everything in common.

We shared the same interests.

We were driven by the same goal.

She got all of my jokes.

She made me laugh.

She made me think.

She changed the way I saw the world.

I'd never had such a powerful, immediate connection with another human being before.

Not even with Aech.

I no longer cared that we were supposed to be rivals, and she didn't seem to either.

We began to share details about our research.

We told each other what movies we were currently watching and what books we were reading.

We even began to exchange theories and to discuss our interpretations of specific passages in the Almanac.

I couldn't make myself be cautious around her.

A little voice in my head kept trying to tell me that every word she said could be disinformation and that she might just be playing me for a fool.

But I didn't believe it.

I trusted her, even though I had every reason not to.

I graduated from high school in early June.

I didn't attend the graduation ceremony.

I'd stopped attending classes altogether when I fled the stacks.

As far as I knew, the Sixers thought I was dead, and I didn't want to tip them off by showing up for my last few weeks of school.

Missing finals week wasn't a big deal, since I already had more than enough credits to receive my diploma.

The school e-mailed a copy of it to me.

They snail-mailed the actual diploma to my address in the stacks, which no longer existed, so I don't know what became of it.

When I finished school, I'd intended to devote all of my time to the Hunt.

But all I really wanted to do was spend time with Art3mis.

When I wasn't hanging out with my new online pseudo-girlfriend, I devoted the rest of my time to leveling up my avatar.

Gunters called this "making the climb to ninety-nine,"

because ninety-ninth level was the maximum power level an avatar could attain.

Art3mis and Aech had both recently done it, and I felt compelled to catch up.

It actually didn't take me very long.

I now had nothing but free time, and I had the money and the means to fully explore the OASIS.

So I began to complete every quest I could find, sometimes jumping five or six levels in one day.

I became a split-class Warrior/Mage.

As my stats continued to increase, I honed my avatar's combat and spell-casting abilities while collecting a wide array of powerful weapons, magic items, and vehicles.

Art3mis and I even teamed up for a few quests.

We visited the planet Goondocks and finished the entire Goonies quest in just one day.

Arty played through it as Martha Plimpton's character, Stef, while I played as Mikey, Sean Astin's character.

It was entirely too much fun.

I didn't spend all of my time goofing off.

I tried to keep my head in the game.

Really I did.

At least once a day, I would pull up the Quatrain and try once again to decipher its meaning.

The captain conceals the Jade Key in a dwelling long neglected But you can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected For a while, I thought that the whistle in the third line might be a reference to a late-'60s Japanese TV show called The Space Giants, which had been dubbed in English and rebroadcast in the United States in the '70s and '80s.

The Space Giants (called Maguma Taishi in Japan) featured a family of transforming robots who lived in a volcano and battled an evil alien villain named Rodak.

Halliday referred to this show several times in Anorak's Almanac, citing it as one of his childhood favorites.

One of the show's main characters was a boy named Miko, who would blow a special whistle to summon the robots to his aid.

I watched all fifty-two ultra-cheesy episodes of The Space Giants, back-to-back, while wolfing down corn chips and taking notes.

But when the viewing marathon was over, I still wasn't any closer to understanding the Quatrain's meaning.

I'd hit another dead end.

I decided that Halliday must be referring to some other whistle.

Then, one Saturday morning, I finally made a small breakthrough.

I was watching a collection of vintage '80s cereal commercials when I paused to wonder why cereal manufacturers no longer included toy prizes inside every box.

It was a tragedy, in my opinion.

Another sign that civilization was going straight down the tubes.

I was still pondering this when an old Cap'n Crunch commercial came on, and that was when I made a connection between the first and third lines of the Quatrain: The captain conceals the Jade Key ...

But you can only blow the whistle ...

Halliday was alluding to a famous '70s hacker named John Draper, better known by the alias Captain Crunch.

Draper was one of the first phone phreaks, and he was famous for discovering that the toy plastic whistles found as prizes in boxes of Cap'n Crunch cereal could be used to make free long-distance phone calls, because they emitted a 2600-hertz tone that tricked the old analog phone system into giving you free access to the line.

The captain conceals the Jade Key That had to be it.

"The captain"

was Cap'n Crunch, and "the whistle"

was the famous toy plastic whistle of phone phreak lore.

Maybe the Jade Key was disguised as one of those toy plastic whistles, and it was hidden in a box of Cap'n Crunch cereal....

But where was that cereal box hidden?

In a dwelling long neglected I still didn't know what long-neglected dwelling that line referred to, or where to look for it.

I visited every neglected dwelling I could think of.

Re-creations of the Addams Family house, the abandoned shack in the Evil Dead trilogy, Tyler Durden's flophouse in Fight Club, and the Lars Homestead on Tattooine.

No luck finding the Jade Key inside any of them.

Dead end after dead end.

But you can only blow the whistle Once the trophies are all collected I still hadn't deciphered the meaning of that last line, either.

What trophies did I have to collect?

Or was that some kind of half-assed metaphor?

There had to be a simple connection I wasn't making, a sly reference that I still wasn't clever or knowledgeable enough to catch.

Since then, I'd failed to make any more progress.

Every time I revisited the Quatrain, my ongoing infatuation with Art3mis would undermine my ability to focus, and before long I would close my grail diary and call her up to see if she wanted to hang out.

She almost always did.

I convinced myself that it was all right to slack off a bit, because no one else seemed to be making any progress in their search for the Jade Key.

The Scoreboard remained unchanged.

Everyone else seemed to be just as stumped as I was.

As the weeks continued to pass, Art3mis and I spent more and more time together.

Even when our avatars were doing other things, we were sending e- mails and instant messages to each other.

A river of words flowed between us.

I wanted more than anything to meet her in the real world.

Face-to-face.

But I didn't tell her this.

I was certain she had strong feelings for me, but she also kept me at a distance.

No matter how much I revealed about myself to her-and I wound up revealing just about everything, including my real name-she always adamantly refused to reveal any details about her own life.

All I knew was that she was nineteen and that she lived somewhere in the Pacific Northwest.

That was all she would tell me.

The image of her that formed in my mind was the most obvious one.

I pictured her as a physical manifestation of her avatar.

I imagined her with the same face, eyes, hair, and body.

Even though she told me repeatedly that in reality she looked almost nothing like her avatar and that she wasn't nearly as attractive in person.

When I began to spend most of my time with Art3mis, Aech and I began to grow apart.

Instead of hanging out several times a week, we chatted a few times a month.

Aech knew I was falling for Art3mis, but he never gave me too much grief about it, even when I would bail on him at the last minute to hang out with her instead.

He would just shrug, tell me to be careful, and say, "I sure hope you know what you're doing, Z."

I didn't, of course.

My whole relationship with Art3mis was in defiance of all common sense.

But I couldn't help falling for her.

Somehow, without my realizing it, my obsession with finding Halliday's Easter egg was gradually being supplanted by my obsession with Art3mis.

Eventually, she and I began to go out on "dates,"

taking day trips to exotic OASIS locales and exclusive night spots.

At first, Art3mis protested.

She thought I should keep a low profile, because as soon as my avatar was spotted in public, the Sixers would know that their attempt to kill me had failed, and I'd be back on their hit list.

But I told her I no longer cared.

I was already hiding from the Sixers in the real world, and I refused to continue hiding from them in the OASIS, too.

Besides, I had a ninety-ninth-level avatar now.

I felt nigh invincible.

Maybe I was just trying to impress Art3mis by acting fearless.

If so, I think it worked.

We still disguised our avatars before we went out, because we knew there would be tabloid headlines galore if Parzival and Art3mis started showing up in public together on a regular basis.

But there was one exception.

One night, she took me to see the Rocky Horror Picture Show in a huge stadium-sized movie theater on the planet Transsexual, where they held the most highly attended and longest-running weekly screening of the movie in the OASIS.

Thousands of avatars came to every show, to sit in the stands and revel in the audience participation.

Normally, only longstanding members of the Rocky Horror Fan Club were permitted to get up onstage and help act out the film in front of the giant movie screen, and only after they'd passed a grueling audition process.

But Art3mis used her fame to pull a few strings, and she and I were both allowed to join the cast for that night's show.

The whole planet was in a no-PvP zone, so I wasn't worried about getting ambushed by the Sixers.

But I did have a serious case of stage fright when the show began.

Art3mis played a note-perfect Columbia, and I had the honor of playing her undead love interest, Eddie.

I altered my avatar's appearance so that I looked exactly like Meat Loaf did in the role, but my performance and lip-synching still kinda sucked.

Luckily, the audience cut me a lot of slack, because I was the famous gunter Parzival, and I was clearly having a blast.

That night was easily the most fun I'd ever had in my life up to that point.

I told Art3mis so afterward, and that was when she leaned over and kissed me for the first time.

I couldn't feel it, of course.

But it still set my heart racing.

I'd heard all the clichd warnings about the perils of falling for someone you only knew online, but I ignored them.

I decided that whoever Art3mis really was, I was in love with her.

I could feel it, deep in the soft, chewy caramel center of my being.

And then one night, like a complete idiot, I told her how I felt.

It was a Friday night, and I was spending another solitary evening doing research, working my way through every episode of Whiz Kids, an early-'80s TV show about a teenage hacker who uses his computer skills to solve mysteries.

I'd just finished watching the episode "Deadly Access"

(a crossover with Simon & Simon) when an e-mail arrived in my inbox.

It was from Ogden Morrow.

The subject line read "We Can Dance If We Want To."

There was no text in the body of the e-mail.

Just a file attachment-an invitation to one of the most exclusive gatherings in the OASIS: Ogden Morrow's birthday party.

In the real world, Morrow almost never made public appearances, and in the OASIS, he came out of hiding only once a year, to host this event.

The invitation featured a photo of Morrow's world-famous avatar, the Great and Powerful Og.

The gray-bearded wizard was hunched over an elaborate DJ mixing board, one headphone pressed to his ear, biting his lower lip in auditory ecstasy as his fingers scratched ancient vinyl on a set of silver turntables.

His record crate bore a DON'T PANIC sticker and an anti-Sixer logo-a yellow number six with a red circle-and-slash over it.

The text at the bottom read Ogden Morrow's '80s Dance Party in celebration of his 73rd birthday!

Tonight-10pm OST at the Distracted Globe ADMIT ONE I was flabbergasted.

Ogden Morrow had actually taken the time to invite me to his birthday party.

It felt like the greatest honor I'd ever received.

I called Art3mis, and she confirmed that she'd received the same e-mail.

She said she couldn't pass up an invitation from Og himself, despite the obvious risks.

So, naturally, I told her I would meet her there at the club.

It was the only way I could avoid looking like a total wuss.

I knew that if Og had invited the two of us, he'd probably also invited the other members of the High Five.

But Aech probably wouldn't show up, because he competed in a globally televised arena deathmatch every Friday night.

And Shoto and Daito never entered a PvP zone unless it was absolutely necessary.

The Distracted Globe was a famous zero-gravity dance club on the planet Neonoir in Sector Sixteen.

Ogden Morrow had coded the place himself decades ago and was still its sole owner.

I'd never visited the Globe before.

I wasn't much for dancing, or for socializing with the twinked-out wannabe-gunter berdorks who were known to frequent the place.

But Og's birthday party was a special event, and so the usual clientele would be banished for the evening.

Tonight, the club would be packed with celebrities-movie stars, musicians, and at least two members of the High Five.

I spent over an hour tweaking my avatar's hair and trying on different skins to wear to the club.

I finally settled on some classic '80s-era attire: a light gray suit, exactly like the one Peter Weller wore in Buckaroo Banzai, complete with a red bow tie, along with a pair of vintage white Adidas high-tops.

I also loaded my inventory with my best suit of body armor and a large amount of weaponry.

One of the reasons the Globe was such a hip, exclusive club was because it was located in a PvP zone, one where both magic and technology functioned.

So it was extremely dangerous to go there.

Especially for a famous gunter like me.

There were hundreds of cyberpunk-themed worlds spread throughout the OASIS, but Neonoir was one of the largest and oldest.

Seen from orbit, the planet was a shiny onyx marble covered in overlapping spider-webs of pulsating light.

It was always night on Neonoir, the world over, and its surface was an uninterrupted grid of interconnected cities packed with impossibly large skyscrapers.

Its skies were filled with a continuous stream of flying vehicles whirring through the vertical cityscapes, and the streets below teemed with leather-clad NPCs and mirror-shaded avatars, all sporting high-tech weaponry and subcutaneous implants as they spouted city-speak straight out of Neuromancer.

The Distracted Globe was located at the western-hemisphere intersection of the Boulevard and the Avenue, two brightly lit streets that stretched completely around the planet along its equator and prime meridian.

The club itself was a massive cobalt blue sphere, three kilometers in diameter, floating thirty meters off the ground.

A floating crystal staircase led up to the club's only entrance, a circular opening at the bottom of the sphere.

I made a big entrance when I arrived in my flying DeLorean, which I'd obtained by completing a Back to the Future quest on the planet Zemeckis.

The DeLorean came outfitted with a (nonfunctioning) flux capacitor, but I'd made several additions to its equipment and appearance.

First, I'd installed an artificially intelligent onboard computer named KITT (purchased in an online auction) into the dashboard, along with a matching red Knight Rider scanner just above the DeLorean's grill.

Then I'd outfitted the car with an oscillation overthruster, a device that allowed it to travel through solid matter.

Finally, to complete my '80s super-vehicle theme, I'd slapped a Ghostbusters logo on each of the DeLorean's gull-wing doors, then added personalized plates that read ECTO-88.

I'd had it only a few weeks now, but my time-traveling, Ghost Busting, Knight Riding, matter-penetrating DeLorean had already become my avatar's trademark.

I knew that leaving my sweet ride parked in a PvP zone was an open invitation for some moron to try to boost it.

The DeLorean had several antitheft systems installed, and the ignition system was booby-trapped Max Rockatanskystyle so that if any other avatar tried to start the car, the plutonium chamber would detonate in a small thermonuclear explosion.

But keeping my car safe wouldn't be a problem here on Neonoir.

As soon as I climbed out of the DeLorean I cast a Shrink spell on it, instantly reducing it to the size of a Matchbox car.

Then I put the DeLorean in my pocket.

Magic zones had their advantages.

Thousands of avatars were packed up against the velvet rope force fields that kept everyone without an invitation at bay.

As I walked toward the entrance, the crowd bombarded me with a mix of insults, autograph requests, death threats, and tearful declarations of undying love.

I had my body shield activated, but surprisingly, no one took a shot at me.

I flashed the cyborg doorman my invitation, then mounted the long crystal staircase leading up into the club.

Entering the Distracted Globe was more than a little disorienting.

The inside of the giant sphere was completely hollow, and its curved interior surface served as the club's bar and lounge area.

The moment you passed through the entrance, the laws of gravity changed.

No matter where you walked, your avatar's feet always adhered to the interior of the sphere, so you could walk in a straight line, up to the "top"

of the club, then back down the other side, ending up right back where you started.

The huge open space in the center of the sphere served as the club's zero-gravity "dance floor."

You reached it simply by jumping off the ground, like Superman taking flight, and then swimming through the air, into the spherical zero-g "groove zone."

As I stepped through the entrance, I glanced up-or in the direction that was currently "up"

to me at the moment-and took a long look around.

The place was packed.

Hundreds of avatars milled around like ants crawling around the inside of a giant balloon.

Others were already out on the dance floor-spinning, flying, twisting, and tumbling in time with the music, which thumped out of floating spherical speakers that drifted throughout the club.

In the middle of all the dancers, a large clear bubble was suspended in space, at the absolute center of the club.

This was the "booth"

where the DJ stood, surrounded by turntables, mixers, decks, and dials.

At the center of all that gear was the opening DJ, R2-D2, hard at work, using his various robotic arms to work the turntables.

I recognized the tune he was playing: the '88 remix of New Order's "Blue Monday,"

with a lot of Star Wars droid sound samples mixed in.

As I made my way to the nearest bar, the avatars I passed all stopped to stare and point in my direction.

I didn't pay them much notice, because I was busy scanning the club for Art3mis.

When I reached the bar, I ordered a Pan-Galactic Gargle Blaster from the female Klingon bartender and downed half of it.

Then I grinned as R2 cued up another classic '80s tune.

"

'Union of the Snake,' "

I recited, mostly out of habit.

"Duran Duran.

Nineteen eighty-three."

"Not bad, ace,"

said a familiar voice, speaking just loud enough to be heard over the music.

I turned to see Art3mis standing behind me.

She was wearing evening attire: a gunmetal blue dress that looked like it was spray-painted on.

Her avatar's dark hair was styled in a pageboy cut, perfectly framing her gorgeous face.

She looked devastating.

She shouted at the barkeep.

"Glenmorangie.

On the rocks."

I smiled to myself.

Connor MacLeod's favorite drink.

Man, did I love this girl.

She winked at me as her drink appeared.

Then she clinked her glass against mine and downed its contents in one swallow.

The chattering of the avatars around us grew in volume.

Word that Parzival and Art3mis were here, chatting each other up at the bar, was already spreading through the entire club.

Art3mis glanced up at the dance floor, then back at me.

"So how about it, Percy?"

she said.

"Feel like cutting a rug?"

I scowled.

"Not if you keep calling me 'Percy.' "

She laughed.

Just then, the current song ended, and the club grew silent.

All eyes turned upward, toward the DJ booth, where R2-D2 was currently dissolving in a shower of light, like someone "beaming out"

in an original Star Trek episode.

Then a huge cheer went up as a familiar gray-haired avatar beamed in, appearing behind the turntables.

It was Og.

Hundreds of vidfeed windows materialized in the air, all over the club.

Each displayed a live close-up image of Og in the booth, so that everyone could see his avatar clearly.

The old wizard was wearing baggy jeans, sandals, and a faded Star Trek: The Next Generation T-shirt.

He waved to the assembled, then cued up his first track, a dance remix of "Rebel Yell"

by Billy Idol.

A cheer swept across the dance floor.

"I love this song!"

Art3mis shouted.

Her eyes darted up to the dance floor.

I looked at her uncertainly.

"What's wrong?"

she said with mock sympathy.

"Can't the boy dance?"

She abruptly locked into the beat, bobbing her head, gyrating her hips.

Then she pushed off from the floor with both feet and began to float upward, drifting toward the groove zone.

I stared up at her, temporarily frozen, mustering my courage.

"All right,"

I muttered to myself.

"What the hell."

I bent my knees and pushed off hard from the floor.

My avatar took flight, drifting upward and sliding alongside Art3mis.

The avatars who were already on the dance floor moved aside to clear a path for us, a tunnel leading to the center of the dance floor.

I could see Og hovering in his bubble, just a short distance above us.

He was spinning around like a dervish, remixing the song on the fly while simultaneously adjusting the gravity vortex of the dance floor, so that he was actually spinning the club itself, like an ancient vinyl disc.

Art3mis winked at me, and then her legs melted together to form a mermaid's tail.

She flapped her new tail fin once and shot ahead of me, her body undulating and thrusting in time with the machine-gun beat as she swam through the air.

Then she spun back around to face me, suspended and floating, smiling and holding out her hand, beckoning me to join her.

Her hair floated in a halo around her head, like she was underwater.

When I reached her, she took my hand.

As she did, her mermaid tail vanished and her legs reappeared, whirling and scissoring to the beat.

Not trusting my instincts any further, I loaded up a piece of high-end avatar dance software called Travoltra, which I'd downloaded and tested earlier that evening.

The program took control of Parzival's movements, synching them up with the music, and all four of my limbs were transformed into undulating cosine waves.

Just like that, I became a dancing fool.

Art3mis's eyes lit up in surprise and delight, and she began to mirror my movements, the two of us orbiting each other like accelerated electrons.

Then Art3mis began shape-shifting.

Her avatar lost its human form and dissolved into a pulsing amorphous blob that changed its size and color in synch with the music.

I selected the mirror partner option on my dance software and began to do the same.

My avatar's limbs and torso began to flow and spin like taffy, encircling Art3mis, while strange color patterns flowed and shifted across my skin.

I looked like Plastic Man, if he were tripping out of his mind on LSD.

Then everyone else on the dance floor also began to shape-shift, melting into prismatic blobs of light.

Soon, the center of the club looked like some otherworldly lava lamp.

When the song ended, Og took a bow, then queued up a slow song.

"Time After Time"

by Cyndi Lauper.

All around us, avatars began to pair up.

I gave Art3mis a courtly bow and stretched out my hand.

She smiled and took it.

I pulled her close and we began to drift together.

Og set the dance floor's gravity on a counterclockwise spin, making all of our avatars slowly rotate around the club's invisible central axis, like motes of dust floating inside a snow globe.

And then, before I could stop myself, the words just came out.

"I'm in love with you, Arty."

She didn't respond at first.

She just looked at me in shock as our avatars continued to drift in orbit around each other, moving on autopilot.

Then she switched to a private voice channel, so no one could eavesdrop on our conversation.

"You aren't in love with me, Z,"

she said.

"You don't even know me."

"Yes I do,"

I insisted.

"I know you better than I've ever known anyone in my entire life."

"You only know what I want you to know.

You only see what I want you to see."

She placed a hand on her chest.

"This isn't my real body, Wade.

Or my real face."

"I don't care!

I'm in love with your mind-with the person you are.

I couldn't care less about the packaging."

"You're just saying that,"

she said.

There was an unsteadiness in her voice.

"Trust me.

If I ever let you see me in person, you would be repulsed."

"Why do you always say that?"

"Because I'm hideously deformed.

Or I'm a paraplegic.

Or I'm actually sixty- three years old.

Take your pick."

"I don't care if you're all three of those things.

Tell me where to meet you and I'll prove it.

I'll get on a plane right now and fly to wherever you are.

You know I will."

She shook her head.

"You don't live in the real world, Z.

From what you've told me, I don't think you ever have.

You're like me.

You live inside this illusion."

She motioned to our virtual surroundings.

"You can't possibly know what real love is."

"Don't say that!"

I was starting to cry and didn't bother hiding it from her.

"Is it because I told you I've never had a real girlfriend?

And that I'm a virgin?

Because-"

"Of course not,"

she said.

"That isn't what this is about.

At all."

"Then what is it about?

Tell me.

Please."

"The Hunt.

You know that.

We've both been neglecting our quests to hang out with each other.

We should be focused on finding the Jade Key right now.

You can bet that's what Sorrento and the Sixers are doing.

And everyone else."

"To hell with our competition!

And the egg!"

I shouted.

"Didn't you hear what I just said?

I'm in love with you!

And I want to be with you.

More than anything."

She just stared at me.

Or rather, her avatar stared blankly back at my avatar.

Then she said, "I'm sorry, Z.

This is all my fault.

I let this get way out of hand.

It has to stop."

"What do you mean?

What has to stop?"

"I think we should take a break.

Stop spending so much time together."

I felt like I'd been punched in the throat.

"Are you breaking up with me?"

"No, Z,"

she said firmly.

"I am not breaking up with you.

That would be impossible, because we are not together."

There was suddenly venom in her voice.

"We've never even met!"

"So then ...

you're just going to ...

stop talking to me?"

"Yes.

I think that would be for the best."

"For how long?"

"Until the Hunt is over."

"But, Arty ...

That could take years."

"I realize that.

And I'm sorry.

But this is how it has to be."

"So winning that money is more important to you than me?"

"It's not about the money.

It's about what I could do with it."

"Right.

Saving the world.

You're so fucking noble."

"Don't be a jerk,"

she said.

"I've been searching for the egg for over five years.

So have you.

Now we're closer than ever to finding it.

I can't just throw my chance away."

"I'm not asking you to."

"Yes, you are.

Even if you don't realize it."

The Cyndi Lauper song ended and Og queued up another dance track -"James Brown Is Dead"

by L.A.

Style.

The club erupted in applause.

I felt like a large wooden stake had been driven into my chest.

Art3mis was about to say something more-good-bye, I think-when we heard a thunderous boom directly up above us.

At first, I thought it was Og, train-wrecking into a new dance track.

But then I looked up and saw the large chunks of rubble tumbling at high speed onto the dance floor as avatars scattered to get out of the way.

A gaping hole had just been blasted in the roof of the club, near the top of the globe.

And a small army of Sixers was now pouring through it, swooping into the club on jet packs, firing blaster pistols as they came.

Total chaos broke out.

Half of the avatars in the club swarmed toward the exit, while the other half drew weapons or began to cast spells, firing laser bolts, bullets, and fireballs back at the invading Sixers.

There were more than a hundred of them, all armed to the teeth.

I couldn't believe the Sixers' bravado.

Why would they be dumb enough to attack a room full of high-level gunters, on their own turf?

They might kill a few of us, but they were going to lose some or all of their own avatars in the process.

And for what?

Then I realized that most of the Sixers' incoming fire seemed to be directed at me and Art3mis.

They were here to kill the two of us.

The news that Art3mis and I were here must have already hit the newsfeeds.

And when Sorrento had learned that the top two gunters on the Scoreboard were hanging out in an unshielded PvP zone, he must have decided that it was too juicy a target to pass up.

This was the Sixers' chance to take out their two biggest competitors in one shot.

It was worth wasting a hundred or so of their highest- level avatars.

I knew my own recklessness had brought them down on us.

I cursed myself for being so foolish.

Then I drew my blasters and began to unload them at the cluster of Sixers nearest to me while also doing my best to dodge their incoming fire.

I glanced over at Art3mis just in time to see her incinerate a dozen Sixers in the space of five seconds, using balls of blue plasma that she hurled out of her palms, while ignoring the steady stream of laser bolts and magic missiles ricocheting off her transparent body shield.

I was taking heavy fire too.

So far my own body shield was holding up, but it wasn't going to last much longer.

Failure warnings were already flashing on my display, and my hit-point counter was starting to plummet.

In seconds, the situation escalated into the largest confrontation I'd ever witnessed.

And it already seemed clear that Art3mis and I were going to be on the losing side.

I noticed that the music still hadn't stopped.

I glanced up at the DJ booth just in time to see it crack open as the Great and Powerful Og emerged from within.

He looked really, really annoyed.

"You jerks think you can crash my birthday party?"

he shouted.

His avatar was still wearing a mic, so his words blasted over the club's speaker array, reverberating like the voice of God.

The melee seemed to halt for a split second as all eyes turned to look at Og, who was now floating at the center of the dance floor.

He stretched out his arms as he turned to face the onslaught of Sixers.

A dozen tines of red lightning erupted from each of Og's fingertips, branching out in all directions.

Each tine struck a different Sixer avatar in the chest while somehow arcing harmlessly around everyone else.

In a millisecond, every single Sixer in the club was completely vaporized.

Their avatars froze and glowed bright red for a few seconds, then simply vanished.

I was awestruck.

It was the most incredible display of power by an avatar I'd ever seen.

"Nobody busts into my joint uninvited!"

Og shouted, his voice echoing through the now-silent club.

The remaining avatars (the ones who hadn't fled the club in terror or been killed in the brief battle) let out a victorious cheer.

Og flew back into the DJ booth, which closed up around him like a transparent cocoon.

"Let's get this party going again, shall we?"

he said, dropping a needle on a techno remix of "Atomic"

by Blondie.

It took a moment for the shock to wear off, but then everyone started to dance again.

I looked around for Art3mis, but she seemed to have vanished.

Then I spotted her avatar flying out of the new exit the Sixer attack had created.

She stopped and hovered outside a moment, just long enough to glance back at me.

My computer woke me up just before sundown, and I began my daily ritual.

"I'm up!"

I shouted at the darkness.

In the weeks since Art3mis had dumped me, I'd had a hard time getting out of bed in the morning.

So I'd disabled my alarm's snooze feature and instructed the computer to blast "Wake Me Up Before You Go-Go"

by Wham!

I loathed that song with every fiber of my being, and getting up was the only way to silence it.

It wasn't the most pleasant way to start my day, but it got me moving.

The song cut off, and my haptic chair reshaped and reoriented itself, transforming from a bed back into its chair configuration, lifting me into a sitting position as it did so.

The computer began to bring the lights up slowly, allowing my eyes to adjust.

No outside light ever penetrated my apartment.

The single window had once provided a view of the Columbus skyline, but I'd spray- painted it completely black a few days after I moved in.

I'd decided that everything outside the window was a distraction from my quest, so I didn't need to waste time staring at it.

I didn't want to hear the outside world, either, but I hadn't been able to improve upon the apartment's existing soundproofing.

So I had to live with the muffled sounds of wind and rain, and of street and air traffic.

Even these could be a distraction.

At times, I'd slip into a kind of trance, sitting with my eyes closed, oblivious to the passage of time, listening to the sounds of the world outside my room.

I'd made several other modifications to the apartment for the sake of security and convenience.

First, I replaced the flimsy door with a new airtight armor- plated vacuum-sealed WarDoor.

Whenever I needed something-food, toilet paper, new gear-I ordered it online, and someone brought it right to my door.

Deliveries worked like this: First, the scanner mounted outside in the hallway would verify the delivery person's identity and my computer would confirm they were delivering something I'd actually ordered.

Then the outer door would unlock itself and slide open, revealing a steel-reinforced air lock about the size of a shower stall.

The delivery person would place the parcel, pizza, or whatever inside the air lock and step back.

The outer door would hiss shut and relock itself; then the package would be scanned, X-rayed, and analyzed eight ways from Wednesday.

Its contents would be verified and delivery confirmation would be sent.

Then I would unlock and open the inner door and receive my goods.

Capitalism would inch forward, without my actually having to interact face-to- face with another human being.

Which was exactly how I preferred it, thank you.

The room itself wasn't much to look at, which was fine, because I spent as little time looking at it as possible.

It was basically a cube, about ten meters long on each side.

A modular shower and toilet unit were embedded in one wall, opposite the small ergonomic kitchen.

I'd never actually used the kitchen to cook anything.

My meals were all frozen or delivered.

Microwave brownies were as close as I ever got to cooking.

The rest of the room was dominated by my OASIS immersion rig.

I'd invested every spare cent I had in it.

Newer, faster, or more versatile components were always being released, so I was constantly spending large chunks of my meager income on upgrades.

The crown jewel in my rig was, of course, my customized OASIS console.

The computer that powered my world.

I'd built it myself, piece by piece, inside a modded mirror-black Odinware sphere chassis.

It had a new overclocked processor that was so fast its cycle-time bordered on pre-cognition.

And the internal hard drive had enough storage space to hold three digitized copies of Everything in Existence.

I spent the majority of my time in my Shaptic Technologies HC5000 fully adjustable haptic chair.

It was suspended by two jointed robotic arms anchored to my apartment's walls and ceiling.

These arms could rotate the chair on all four axes, so when I was strapped in to it, the unit could flip, spin, or shake my body to create the sensation that I was falling, flying, or sitting behind the wheel of a nuclear-powered rocket sled hurtling at Mach 2 through a canyon on the fourth moon of Altair VI.

The chair worked in conjunction with my Shaptic Bootsuit, a full-body haptic feedback suit.

It covered every inch of my body from the neck down and had discreet openings so I could relieve myself without removing the entire thing.

The outside of the suit was covered with an elaborate exoskeleton, a network of artificial tendons and joints that could both sense and inhibit my movements.

Built into the inside of the suit was a weblike network of miniature actuators that made contact with my skin every few centimeters.

These could be activated in small or large groups for the purpose of tactile simulation-to make my skin feel things that weren't really there.

They could convincingly simulate the sensation of a tap on the shoulder, a kick to the shin, or a gunshot in the chest.

(Built-in safety software prevented my rig from actually causing me any physical harm, so a simulated gunshot actually felt more like a weak punch.) I had an identical backup suit hanging in the MoshWash cleaning unit in the corner of the room.

These two haptic suits made up my entire wardrobe.

My old street clothes were buried somewhere in the closet, collecting dust.

On my hands, I wore a pair of state-of-the-art Okagami IdleHands haptic datagloves.

Special tactile feedback pads covered both palms, allowing the gloves to create the illusion that I was touching objects and surfaces that didn't actually exist.

My visor was a brand-new pair of Dinatro RLR-7800 WreckSpex, featuring a top-of-the-line virtual retinal display.

The visor drew the OASIS directly onto my retinas, at the highest frame rate and resolution perceptible to the human eye.

The real world looked washed-out and blurry by comparison.

The RLR-7800 was a not-yet-available-to-the-plebian-masses prototype, but I had an endorsement deal with Dinatro, so they sent me free gear (shipped to me through a series of remailing services, which I used to maintain my anonymity).

My AboundSound audio system consisted of an array of ultrathin speakers mounted on the apartment's walls, floor, and ceiling, providing 360 degrees of perfect spatial pin-drop sound reproduction.

And the Mjolnur subwoofer was powerful enough to make my back teeth vibrate.

The Olfatrix smell tower in the corner was capable of generating over two thousand discernible odors.

A rose garden, salty ocean wind, burning cordite- the tower could convincingly re-create them all.

It also doubled as an industrial- strength air conditioner/purifier, which was primarily what I used it for.

A lot of jokers liked to code really horrific smells into their simulations, just to mess with people who owned smell towers, so I usually left the odor generator disabled, unless I was in a part of the OASIS where I thought being able to smell my surroundings might prove useful.

On the floor, directly underneath my suspended haptic chair, was my Okagami Runaround omnidirectional treadmill.

("No matter where you go, there you are"

was the manufacturer's slogan.) The treadmill was about two meters square and six centimeters thick.

When it was activated, I could run at top speed in any direction and never reach the edge of the platform.

If I changed direction, the treadmill would sense it, and its rolling surface would change direction to match me, always keeping my body near the center of its platform.

This model was also equipped with built-in lifts and an amorphous surface, so that it could simulate walking up inclines and staircases.

You could also purchase an ACHD (anatomically correct haptic doll), if you wanted to have more "intimate"

encounters inside the OASIS.

ACHDs came in male, female, and dual-sex models, and were available with a wide array of options.

Realistic latex skin.

Servomotor-driven endoskeletons.

Simulated musculature.

And all of the attendant appendages and orifices one would imagine.

Driven by loneliness, curiosity, and raging teen hormones, I'd purchased a midrange ACHD, the Shaptic berBetty, a few weeks after Art3mis stopped speaking to me.

After spending several highly unproductive days inside a stand- alone brothel simulation called the Pleasuredome, I'd gotten rid of the doll, out of a combination of shame and self-preservation.

I'd wasted thousands of credits, missed a whole week of work, and was on the verge of completely abandoning my quest for the egg when I confronted the grim realization that virtual sex, no matter how realistic, was really nothing but glorified, computer- assisted masturbation.

At the end of the day, I was still a virgin, all alone in a dark room, humping a lubed-up robot.

So I got rid of the ACHD and went back to spanking the monkey the old-fashioned way.

I felt no shame about masturbating.

Thanks to Anorak's Almanac, I now thought of it as a normal bodily function, as necessary and natural as sleeping or eating.

AA 241:87-I would argue that masturbation is the human animal's most important adaptation.

The very cornerstone of our technological civilization.

Our hands evolved to grip tools, all right-including our own.

You see, thinkers, inventors, and scientists are usually geeks, and geeks have a harder time getting laid than anyone.

Without the built-in sexual release valve provided by masturbation, it's doubtful that early humans would have ever mastered the secrets of fire or discovered the wheel.

And you can bet that Galileo, Newton, and Einstein never would have made their discoveries if they hadn't first been able to clear their heads by slapping the salami (or "knocking a few protons off the old hydrogen atom").

The same goes for Marie Curie.

Before she discovered radium, you can be certain she first discovered the little man in the canoe.

It wasn't one of Halliday's more popular theories, but I liked it.

As I shuffled over to the toilet, a large flat-screen monitor mounted on the wall switched on, and the smiling face of Max, my system agent software, appeared on the screen.

I'd programmed Max to start up a few minutes after I turned on the lights, so I could wake up a little bit before he started jabbering to me.

"G-g-good morning, Wade!"

Max stuttered cheerily.

"Rise and sh-sh-shine!"

Running system agent software was a little like having a virtual personal assistant-one that also functioned as a voice-activated interface with your computer.

System agent software was highly configurable, with hundreds of preprogrammed personalities to choose from.

I'd programmed mine to look, sound, and behave like Max Headroom, the (ostensibly) computer-generated star of a late-'80s talk show, a groundbreaking cyberpunk TV series, and a slew of Coke commercials.

"Good morning, Max,"

I replied groggily.

"I think you mean good evening, Rumpelstiltskin.

It's 7:18 p.m., OASIS Sta- sta-standard Time, Wednesday, December thirtieth."

Max was programmed to speak with a slight electronic stutter.

In the mid-'80s, when the character of Max Headroom was created, computers weren't actually powerful enough to generate a photorealistic human figure, so Max had been portrayed by an actor (the brilliant Matt Frewer) who wore a lot of rubber makeup to make him look computer-generated.

But the version of Max now smiling at me on the monitor was pure software, with the best simulated AI and voice-recognition subroutines money could buy.

I'd been running a highly customized version of MaxHeadroom v3.4.1 for a few weeks now.

Before that, my system agent software had been modeled after the actress Erin Gray (of Buck Rogers and Silver Spoons fame).

But she'd proved to be way too distracting, so I'd switched to Max.

He was annoying at times, but he also cracked me up.

He did a pretty decent job of keeping me from feeling lonesome, too.

As I stumbled into the bathroom module and emptied my bladder, Max continued to address me from a small monitor mounted above the mirror.

"Uh- oh!

It appears you've sp-sp-sprung a leak!"

he said.

"Get a new joke,"

I said.

"Any news I should know about?"

"Just the usual.

Wars, rioting, famine.

Nothing that would interest you."

"Any messages?"

He rolled his eyes.

"A few.

But to answer your real question, no.

Art3mis still hasn't called or written you back, lover boy."

"I've warned you.

Don't call me that, Max.

You're begging to be deleted."

"Touchy, touchy.

Honestly, Wade.

When did you get so s-s-sensitive?"

"I'll erase you, Max.

I mean it.

Keep it up and I'll switch back to Wilma Deering.

Or I'll try out the disembodied voice of Majel Barrett."

Max made a pouty face and spun around to face the shifting digital wallpaper behind him-currently a pattern of multicolored vector lines.

Max was always like this.

Giving me grief was part of his preprogrammed personality.

I actually sort of enjoyed it, because it reminded me of hanging out with Aech.

And I really missed hanging out with Aech.

A lot.

My gaze dropped to the bathroom mirror, but I didn't much like what I saw there, so I closed my eyes until I finished urinating.

I wondered (not for the first time) why I hadn't painted the mirror black too, when I'd done the window.

The hour or so after I woke up was my least favorite part of each day, because I spent it in the real world.

This was when I dealt with the tedious business of cleaning and exercising my physical body.

I hated this part of the day because everything about it contradicted my other life.

My real life, inside the OASIS.

The sight of my tiny one-room apartment, my immersion rig, or my reflection in the mirror-they all served as a harsh reminder that the world I spent my days in was not, in fact, the real one.

"Retract chair,"

I said as I stepped out of the bathroom.

The haptic chair instantly flattened itself again, then retracted so that it was flush against the wall, clearing a large empty space in the center of the room.

I pulled on my visor and loaded up the Gym, a stand-alone simulation.

Now I was standing in a large modern fitness center lined with exercise equipment and weight machines, all of which could be perfectly simulated by my haptic suit.

I began my daily workout.

Sit-ups, stomach crunches, push-ups, aerobics, weight training.

Occasionally, Max would shout words of encouragement.

"Get those legs up, you s-s-sissy!

Feel the burn!"

I usually got a little exercise while logged into the OASIS, by engaging in physical combat or running around the virtual landscape on my treadmill.

But I spent the vast majority of my time sitting in my haptic chair, getting almost no exercise at all.

I also had a habit of overeating when I was depressed or frustrated, which was most of the time.

As a result, I'd gradually started to put on some extra pounds.

I wasn't in the best shape to begin with, so I quickly reached a point where I could no longer fit comfortably in my haptic chair or squeeze in to my XL haptic suit.

Soon, I would need to buy a new rig, with components from the Husky line.

I knew that if I didn't get my weight under control, I would probably die of sloth before I found the egg.

I couldn't let that happen.

So I made a snap decision and enabled the voluntary OASIS fitness lockout software on my rig.

I'd regretted it almost immediately.

From then on, my computer monitored my vital signs and kept track of exactly how many calories I burned during the course of each day.

If I didn't meet my daily exercise requirements, the system prevented me from logging into my OASIS account.

This meant that I couldn't go to work, continue my quest, or, in effect, live my life.

Once the lockout was engaged, you couldn't disable it for two months.

And the software was bound to my OASIS account, so I couldn't just buy a new computer or go rent a booth in some public OASIS caf.

If I wanted to log in, I had no choice but to exercise first.

This proved to be the only motivation I needed.

The lockout software also monitored my dietary intake.

Each day I was allowed to select meals from a preset menu of healthy, low-calorie foods.

The software would order the food for me online and it would be delivered to my door.

Since I never left my apartment, it was easy for the program to keep track of everything I ate.

If I ordered additional food on my own, it would increase the amount of exercise I had to do each day, to offset my additional calorie intake.

This was some sadistic software.

But it worked.

The pounds began to melt off, and after a few months, I was in near-perfect health.

For the first time in my life I had a flat stomach, and muscles.

I also had twice the energy, and I got sick a lot less frequently.

When the two months ended and I was finally given the option to disable the fitness lockout, I decided to keep it in place.

Now, exercising was a part of my daily ritual.

Once I finished with my weight training, I stepped onto my treadmill.

"Begin morning run,"

I said to Max.

"Bifrost track."

The virtual gym vanished.

Now I was standing on a semitransparent running track, a curved looping ribbon suspended in a starry nebula.

Giant ringed planets and multicolored moons were suspended in space all around me.

The running track stretched out ahead of me, rising, falling, and occasionally spiraling into a helix.

An invisible barrier prevented me from accidentally running off the edge of the track and plummeting into the starry abyss.

The Bifrost track was another stand-alone simulation, one of several hundred track designs stored on my console's hard drive.

As I began to run, Max fired up my '80s music playlist.

As the first song began, I quickly rattled off its title, artist, album, and year of release from memory: "

'A Million Miles Away,' the Plimsouls, Everywhere at Once, 1983."

Then I began to sing along, reciting the lyrics.

Having the right '80s song lyric memorized might save my avatar's life someday.

When I finished my run, I pulled off my visor and began removing my haptic suit.

This had to be done slowly to prevent damaging the suit's components.

As I carefully peeled it off, the contact patches made tiny popping sounds as they pulled free of my skin, leaving tiny circular marks all over my body.

Once I had the suit off, I placed it inside the cleaning unit and laid my clean spare suit out on the floor.

Max had already turned on the shower for me, setting the water temperature right where I liked it.

As I jumped into the steam-filled stall, Max switched the music over to my shower tunes playlist.

I recognized the opening riffs of "Change,"

by John Waite.

From the Vision Quest soundtrack.

Geffen Records, 1985.

The shower worked a lot like an old car wash.

I just stood there while it did most of the work, blasting me from all angles with jets of soapy water, then rinsing me off.

I had no hair to wash, because the shower also dispensed a nontoxic hair-removing solution that I rubbed all over my face and body.

This eliminated the need for me to shave or cut my hair, both hassles I didn't need.

Having smooth skin also helped make sure my haptic suit fit snugly.

I looked a little freaky without any eyebrows, but I got used to it.

When the rinse jets cut off, the blow-dryers kicked on, blasting the moisture off of my skin in a matter of seconds.

I stepped into the kitchen and took out a can of Sludge, a high-protein, vitamin Dinfused breakfast drink (to help counteract my sunlight deprivation).

As I gulped it down, my computer's sensors silently took note, scanning the barcode and adding the calories to my total for the day.

With breakfast out of the way, I pulled on my clean haptic suit.

This was less tricky than taking the suit off, but it still took time to do properly.

Once I had the suit on, I ordered the haptic chair to extend.

Then I paused and spent a moment staring at my immersion rig.

I'd been so proud of all this high- tech hardware when I'd first purchased it.

But over the past few months, I'd come to see my rig for what it was: an elaborate contraption for deceiving my senses, to allow me to live in a world that didn't exist.

Each component of my rig was a bar in the cell where I had willingly imprisoned myself.

Standing there, under the bleak fluorescents of my tiny one-room apartment, there was no escaping the truth.

In real life, I was nothing but an antisocial hermit.

A recluse.

A pale-skinned pop cultureobsessed geek.

An agoraphobic shut-in, with no real friends, family, or genuine human contact.

I was just another sad, lost, lonely soul, wasting his life on a glorified videogame.

But not in the OASIS.

In there, I was the great Parzival.

World-famous gunter and international celebrity.

People asked for my autograph.

I had a fan club.

Several, actually.

I was recognized everywhere I went (but only when I wanted to be).

I was paid to endorse products.

People admired and looked up to me.

I got invited to the most exclusive parties.

I went to all the hippest clubs and never had to wait in line.

I was a pop-culture icon, a VR rock star.

And, in gunter circles, I was a legend.

Nay, a god.

I sat down and pulled on my gloves and visor.

Once my identity was verified, the Gregarious Simulation Systems logo appeared in front of me, followed by the log-in prompt.

Greetings, Parzival.

Please speak your pass phrase.

I cleared my throat and recited my pass phrase.

Each word appeared on my display as I said it.

"No one in the world ever gets what they want and that is beautiful."

There was a brief pause, and then I let out an involuntary sigh of relief as the OASIS faded into existence all around me.

My avatar slowly materialized in front of the control panel in my stronghold's command center, the same spot where I'd been sitting the night before, engaged in my evening ritual of staring blankly at the Quatrain until I drifted off to sleep and the system logged me out.

I'd been staring at the damn thing for almost six months now, and I still hadn't been able to decipher it.

No one had.

Everyone had theories, of course, but the Jade Key still remained unfound, and top rankings on the Scoreboard remained static.

My command center was located under an armored dome embedded in the rocky surface of my own private asteroid.

From here I had a sweeping 360- degree view of the surrounding cratered landscape, stretching to the horizon in all directions.

The rest of my stronghold was belowground, in a vast subterranean complex that stretched all the way to the asteroid's core.

I'd coded the entire thing myself, shortly after moving to Columbus.

My avatar needed a stronghold, and I didn't want any neighbors, so I'd bought the cheapest planetoid I could find-this tiny barren asteroid in Sector Fourteen.

Its designation was S14A316, but I'd renamed it Falco, after the Austrian rap star.

(I wasn't a huge Falco fan or anything.

I just thought it sounded like a cool name.) Falco had only a few square kilometers of surface area, but it had still cost me a pretty penny.

It had been worth it, though.

When you owned your own world, you could build whatever you wanted there.

And no one could visit it unless I granted them access, something I never gave to anyone.

My stronghold was my home inside the OASIS.

My avatar's sanctuary.

It was the one place in the entire simulation where I was truly safe.

As soon as my log-in sequence completed, a window popped up on my display, informing me that today was an election day.

Now that I was eighteen, I could vote, in both the OASIS elections and the elections for U.S.

government officials.

I didn't bother with the latter, because I didn't see the point.

The once- great country into which I'd been born now resembled its former self in name only.

It didn't matter who was in charge.

Those people were rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic and everyone knew it.

Besides, now that everyone could vote from home, via the OASIS, the only people who could get elected were movie stars, reality TV personalities, or radical televangelists.

I did take the time to vote in the OASIS elections, however, because their outcomes actually affected me.

The voting process only took me a few minutes, because I was already familiar with all of the major issues GSS had put on the ballot.

It was also time to elect the president and VP of the OASIS User Council, but that was a no-brainer.

Like most gunters, I voted to reelect Cory Doctorow and Wil Wheaton (again).

There were no term limits, and those two geezers had been doing a kick-ass job of protecting user rights for over a decade.

When I finished voting, I adjusted my haptic chair slightly and studied the command console in front of me.

It was crammed with switches, buttons, keyboards, joysticks, and display screens.

A bank of security monitors on my left were linked to virtual cameras placed throughout the interior and exterior of my stronghold.

To my right, another bank of monitors displayed all of my favorite news and entertainment vidfeeds.

Among these was my own channel: Parzival- TV-Broadcasting obscure eclectic crap, 24-7-365.

Earlier that year, GSS had added a new feature to every OASIS user's account: the POV (personal OASIS vidfeed) channel.

It allowed anyone who paid a monthly fee to run their own streaming television network.

Anyone logged into the simulation could tune in and watch your POV channel, from anywhere in the world.

What you aired on your channel and who you allowed to view it were entirely up to you.

Most users chose to run a "voyeur channel,"

which was like being the star of your own twenty-four-hour reality show.

Hovering virtual cameras would follow your avatar around the OASIS as you went about your day-to-day activities.

You could limit access to your channel so that only your friends could watch, or you could charge viewers by the hour to access your POV.

A lot of second-tier celebrities and pornographers did this, selling their virtual lives at a per-minute premium.

Some people used their POV to broadcast live video of their real-world selves, or their dog, or their kids.

Some people programmed nothing but old cartoons.

The possibilities were endless, and the variety of stuff available seemed to grow more twisted every day.

Nonstop foot fetish videos broadcast out of Eastern Europe.

Amateur porn featuring deviant soccer moms in Minnesota.

You name it.

Every flavor of weirdness the human psyche could cook up was being filmed and broadcast online.

The vast wasteland of television programming had finally reached its zenith, and the average person was no longer limited to fifteen minutes of fame.

Now everyone could be on TV, every second of every day, whether or not anyone was watching.

Parzival-TV wasn't a voyeur channel.

In fact, I never showed my avatar's face on my vidfeed.

Instead, I programmed a selection of classic '80s TV shows, retro commercials, cartoons, music videos, and movies.

Lots of movies.

On the weekends, I showed old Japanese monster flicks, along with some vintage anime.

Whatever struck my fancy.

It didn't really matter what I programmed.

My avatar was still one of the High Five, so my vidfeed drew millions of viewers every day, regardless of what I aired, and this allowed me to sell commercial time to my various sponsors.

Most of Parzival-TV's regular viewers were gunters who monitored my vidfeed with the hope that I'd inadvertently reveal some key piece of information about the Jade Key or the egg itself.

I never did, of course.

At the moment, Parzival-TV was wrapping up a nonstop two-day Kikaider marathon.

Kikaider was a late-'70s Japanese action show about a red-and-blue android who beat the crap out of rubber-suited monsters in each episode.

I had a weakness for vintage kaiju and tokusatsu, shows like Spectreman, The Space Giants, and Supaidaman.

I pulled up my programming grid and made a few changes to my evening lineup.

I cleared away the episodes of Riptide and Misfits of Science I'd programmed and dropped in a few back-to-back flicks starring Gamera, my favorite giant flying turtle.

I thought they should be real crowd pleasers.

Then, to finish off the broadcast day, I added a few episodes of Silver Spoons.

Art3mis also ran her own vidfeed channel, Art3mivision, and I always kept one of my monitors tuned to it.

Right now, she was airing her usual Monday evening fare: an episode of Square Pegs.

After that would be ElectraWoman and DynaGirl, followed by back-to-back episodes of Isis and Wonder Woman.

Her programming lineup hadn't changed in ages.

But it didn't matter.

She still got killer ratings.

Recently, she'd also launched her own wildly successful clothing line for full-figured female avatars, under the label Art3Miss.

She was doing really well for herself.

After that night in the Distracted Globe, Art3mis had cut off all contact with me.

She blocked all of my e-mails, phone calls, and chat requests.

She also stopped making posts to her blog.

I tried everything I could think of to reach her.

I sent her avatar flowers.

I made multiple trips to her avatar's stronghold, an armored palace on Benatar, the small moon she owned.

I dropped mix tapes and notes on her palace from the air, like lovesick bombs.

Once, in a supreme act of desperation, I stood outside her palace gates for two solid hours, with a boom box over my head, blasting "In Your Eyes"

by Peter Gabriel at full volume.

She didn't come out.

I don't even know if she was home.

I'd been living in Columbus for over five months now, and it had been eight long, torturous weeks since I'd last spoken to Art3mis.

But I hadn't spent that time moping around and feeling sorry for myself.

Well, not all of it, anyway.

I'd tried to enjoy my "new life"

as a world-famous sector-hopping gunter.

Even though I'd maxxed out my avatar's power level, I continued to complete as many quests as possible, to add to my already impressive collection of weapons, magic items, and vehicles, which I kept in a vault deep within my stronghold.

Questing kept me busy and served as a welcome distraction from the growing loneliness and isolation I felt.

I'd tried to reconnect with Aech after Art3mis had dumped me, but things weren't the same.

We'd grown apart, and I knew it was my fault.

Our conversations were now stilted and reserved, as if we were both afraid of revealing some key piece of information the other might be able to use.

I could tell he no longer trusted me.

And while I'd been off obsessing over Art3mis, it seemed Aech had become obsessed with being the first gunter to find the Jade Key.

But it had been almost half a year since we'd cleared the First Gate, and the Jade Key's location still remained a mystery.

I hadn't spoken to Aech in almost a month.

My last conversation with him had devolved into a shouting match, which had ended when I reminded Aech that he "never even would have found the Copper Key"

if I hadn't led him straight to it.

He'd glared at me in silence for a second, then logged out of the chat room.

Stubborn pride kept me from calling him back right away to apologize, and now it seemed like too much time had passed.

Yeah.

I was on a roll.

In less than six months, I'd managed to wreck both of my closest friendships.

I flipped over to Aech's channel, which he called the H-Feed.

He was currently showing a WWF match from the late '80s, featuring Hulk Hogan and Andre the Giant.

I didn't even bother checking Daito and Shoto's channel, the Daishow, because I knew they'd be showing some old samurai movie.

That's all those guys ever aired.

A few months after our confrontational first meeting in Aech's basement, I'd managed to form a tenuous friendship with Daito and Shoto when the three of us teamed up to complete an extended quest in Sector Twenty-two.

It was my idea.

I felt bad about how our first encounter had ended, and I waited for an opportunity to extend some sort of olive branch to the two samurai.

It came when I discovered a hidden high-level quest called Shodai Urutoraman on the planet Tokusatsu.

The creation date in the quest's colophon said it had been launched several years after Halliday's death, which meant it couldn't have any relation to the contest.

It was also a Japanese-language quest, created by GSS's Hokkaido division.

I could have tried to complete it on my own, using the Mandarax real-time translator software installed in all OASIS accounts, but it would have been risky.

Mandarax had been known to garble or misinterpret quest instructions and cues, which could easily lead to fatal mistakes.

Daito and Shoto lived in Japan (they'd become national heroes there), and I knew that they both spoke Japanese and English fluently.

So I'd contacted them to ask if they were interested in teaming up with me, just for this one quest.

They were skeptical at first, but after I described the unique nature of the quest, and what I believed the payoff for solving it might be, they finally agreed.

The three of us met outside the quest gate on Tokusatsu and entered it together.

The quest was a re-creation of all thirty-nine episodes of the original Ultraman TV series, which had aired on Japanese television from 1966 to 1967.

The show's storyline centered around a human named Hayata who was a member of the Science Patrol, an organization devoted to fighting the hordes of giant Godzilla-like monsters that were constantly attacking Earth and threatening human civilization.

When the Science Patrol encountered a threat they couldn't handle on their own, Hayata would use an alien device called a Beta Capsule to transform into an alien super-being known as Ultraman.

Then he would proceed to kick the monster-of-the-week's ass, using all sorts of kung-fu moves and energy attacks.

If I'd entered the quest gate by myself, I would have automatically played through the entire series storyline as Hayata.

But because Shoto, Daito, and I had all entered at once, we were each allowed to select a different Science Patrol team member to play.

We could then change or swap characters at the start of the next level or "episode."

The three of us took turns playing Hayata and his Science Patrol teammates Hoshino and Arashi.

As with most quests in the OASIS, playing as a team made it easier to defeat the various enemies and complete each of the levels.

It took us an entire week, often playing over sixteen hours a day, before we were finally able to clear all thirty-nine levels and complete the quest.

As we stepped out of the quest gate, our avatars were each awarded a huge amount of experience points and several thousand credits.

But the real prize for completing the quest was an incredibly rare artifact: Hayata's Beta Capsule.

The small metal cylinder allowed the avatar who possessed it to transform into Ultraman once a day, for up to three minutes.

Since there were three of us, there was a debate over who should be allowed to keep the artifact.

"Parzival should have it,"

Shoto had said, turning to his older brother.

"He found this quest.

We wouldn't even have known about it, were it not for him."

Of course, Daito had disagreed.

"And he would not have been able to complete the quest without our help!"

He said the only fair thing to do would be to auction off the Beta Capsule and split the proceeds.

But there was no way I could allow that.

The artifact was far too valuable to sell, and I knew it would end up in the hands of the Sixers, because they purchased nearly every major artifact that went up for auction.

I also saw this as an opportunity to get on Daisho's good side.

"You two should keep the Beta Capsule,"

I said.

"Urutoraman is Japan's greatest superhero.

His powers belong in Japanese hands."

They were both surprised and humbled by my generosity.

Especially Daito.

"Thank you, Parzival-san,"

he said, bowing low.

"You are a man of honor."

After that, the three of us had parted as friends, if not necessarily allies, and I considered that an ample reward for my efforts.

A chime sounded in my ears and I checked the time.

It was almost eight o'clock.

Time to make the doughnuts.

I was always hard-up for cash, no matter how frugal I tried to be.

I had several large bills to pay each month, both in the real world and in the OASIS.

My real- world expenses were pretty standard.

Rent, electricity, food, water.

Hardware repairs and upgrades.

My avatar's expenses were far more exotic.

Spacecraft repairs.

Teleportation fees.

Power cells.

Ammunition.

I purchased my ammo in bulk, but it still wasn't cheap.

And my monthly teleportation expenses were often astronomical.

My search for the egg required constant travel, and GSS kept raising their teleportation fares.

I'd already spent all of my remaining product endorsement dough.

Most of it went toward the cost of my rig and buying my own asteroid.

I earned a decent amount of money each month by selling commercial time on my POV channel and by auctioning off any unneeded magic items, armor, or weapons I acquired during my travels.

But my primary source of income was my full-time job doing OASIS technical support.

When I'd created my new Bryce Lynch identity, I'd given myself a college degree, along with multiple technical certifications and a long, sterling work record as an OASIS programmer and app developer.

However, despite my sterling bogus rsum, the only job I'd been able to get was as a tier-one technical support representative at Helpful Helpdesk Inc., one of the contract firms GSS used to handle OASIS customer service and support.

Now I worked forty hours a week, helping morons reboot their OASIS consoles and update the drivers for their haptic gloves.

It was grueling work, but it paid the rent.

I logged out of my own OASIS account and then used my rig to log into a separate OASIS account I'd been issued for work.

The log-in process completed and I took control of a Happy Helpdesk avatar, a cookie-cutter Ken doll that I used to take tech-support calls.

This avatar appeared inside a huge virtual call center, inside a virtual cubicle, sitting at a virtual desk, in front of a virtual computer, wearing a virtual phone headset.

I thought of this place as my own private virtual hell.

Helpful Helpdesk Inc.

took millions of calls a day, from all over the world.

Twenty-four seven, three sixty-five.

One angry, befuddled cretin after another.

There was no downtime between calls, because there were always several hundred morons in the call queue, all of them willing to wait on hold for hours to have a tech rep hold their hand and fix their problem.

Why bother looking up the solution online?

Why try to figure the problem out on your own when you could have someone else do your thinking for you?

As usual, my ten-hour shift passed slowly.

It was impossible for helpdesk avatars to leave their cubicles, but I found other ways to pass the time.

My work account was rigged so that I couldn't browse outside websites, but I'd hacked my visor to allow me to listen to music or stream movies off my hard drive while I took calls.

When my shift finally ended and I logged out of work, I immediately logged back into my own OASIS account.

I had thousands of new e-mail messages waiting, and I could tell just by their subject lines what had happened while I'd been at work.

Art3mis had found the Jade Key.

Like other gunters around the globe, I'd been dreading the next change on the Scoreboard, because I knew it was going to give the Sixers an unfair advantage.

A few months after we'd all cleared the First Gate, an anonymous avatar had placed an ultrapowerful artifact up for auction.

It was called Fyndoro's Tablet of Finding, and it had unique powers that could give its owner a huge advantage in the hunt for Halliday's Easter egg.

Most of the virtual items in the OASIS were created by the system at random, and they would "drop"

when you killed an NPC or completed a quest.

The rarest such items were artifacts, superpowerful magic items that gave their owners incredible abilities.

Only a few hundred of these artifacts existed, and most of them dated back to the earliest days of the OASIS, when it was still primarily an MMO game.

Every artifact was unique, meaning that only one copy of it existed in the entire simulation.

Usually, the way to obtain an artifact was to defeat some godlike villain at the end of a high-level quest.

If you got lucky, the bad guy would drop an artifact when you killed him.

You could also obtain an artifact by killing an avatar who had one in its inventory, or by purchasing one in an online auction.

Since artifacts were so rare, it was always big news when one went up for auction.

Some had been known to sell for hundreds of thousands of credits, depending on their powers.

The record had been set three years ago when an artifact called the Cataclyst was auctioned off.

According to its auction listing, the Cataclyst was a sort of magical bomb, and it could be used only once.

When it was detonated, it would kill every single avatar and NPC in the sector, including its owner.

There was no defense against it.

If you were unlucky enough to be in the same sector when it went off, you were a goner, regardless of how powerful or well protected you were.

The Cataclyst had sold to an anonymous bidder for just over a million credits.

The artifact still hadn't been detonated, so its new owner still had it sitting around somewhere, waiting for the right time to use it.

It was something of a running joke now.

When a gunter was surrounded by avatars she didn't like, she would claim to have the Cataclyst in her inventory and threaten to detonate it.

But most people suspected that the item had actually fallen into the Sixers' hands, along with countless other powerful artifacts.

Fyndoro's Tablet of Finding wound up selling for even more than the Cataclyst.

According to the auction description, the tablet was a flat circle of polished black stone, and it had one very simple power.

Once a day, its owner could write any avatar's name on its surface, and the tablet would display that avatar's location at that exact moment.

However, this power had range limitations.

If you were in a different OASIS sector than the avatar you were trying to find, the tablet would tell you only which sector your target was currently in.

If you were already in the same sector, the tablet would tell you what planet your target was currently on (or closest to, if they were out in space).

If you were already on the same planet as your target when you used the tablet, it would show you their exact coordinates on a map.

As the artifact's seller made sure to point out in his auction listing, if you used the tablet's power in conjunction with the Scoreboard, it arguably became the most valuable artifact in the entire OASIS.

All you had to do was watch the top rankings on the Scoreboard and wait until someone's score increased.

The second that happened, you could write that avatar's name on the tablet and it would tell you where they were at that exact moment, thus revealing the location of the key they'd just found, or the gate they'd just exited.

Due to the artifact's range limitations, it might take two or three attempts to narrow down the exact location of a key or a gate, but even so, that was still information a lot of people would be willing to kill for.

When Fyndoro's Tablet of Finding went up for auction, a huge bidding war broke out between several of the large gunter clans.

But when the auction finally ended, the tablet wound up selling to the Sixers for almost two million credits.

Sorrento himself used his own IOI account to bid on the tablet.

He waited until the last few seconds of the auction and then outbid everyone.

He could have bid anonymously, but he obviously wanted the world to know who now possessed the artifact.

It was also his way of letting those of us in the High Five know that from that moment forward, whenever one of us found a key or cleared a gate, the Sixers would be tracking us.

And there was nothing we could do about it.

At first, I was worried the Sixers would also try to use the tablet to hunt down each of our avatars and kill us one at a time.

But locating our avatars wouldn't do them any good unless we happened to be in a PvP zone at the time and were stupid enough to stay put until the Sixers could reach us.

And since the tablet could be used only once a day, they would also run the risk of missing their window of opportunity if the Scoreboard changed on the same day they tried to use the tablet to locate one of us.

They didn't take the chance.

They kept the artifact in reserve and waited for their moment.

Less than a half hour after Art3mis's score increase, the entire Sixer fleet was spotted converging on Sector Seven.

The moment the Scoreboard changed, the Sixers had obviously used Fyndoro's Tablet of Finding to try to ascertain Art3mis's exact location.

Luckily, the Sixer avatar using the tablet (probably Sorrento himself) happened to be in a different sector from Art3mis, so the tablet didn't reveal what planet she was on.

It only told the Sixers which sector she was currently in.

And so the entire Sixer fleet had immediately hightailed it to Sector Seven.

Thanks to their complete lack of subtlety, the whole world now knew the Jade Key must be hidden somewhere in that sector.

Naturally, thousands of gunters began to converge on it too.

The Sixers had narrowed the search area for everyone.

Luckily, Sector Seven contained hundreds of planets, moons, and other worlds, and the Jade Key could have been hidden on any one of them.

I spent the rest of the day in shock, reeling at the news that I'd been dethroned.

That was exactly how the newsfeed headlines put it: PARZIVAL DETHRONED!

ART3MIS NEW #1 GUNTER!

SIXERS CLOSING IN!

Once I finally got a grip, I pulled up the Scoreboard and made myself stare at it for thirty solid minutes while I mentally berated myself.

HIGH SCORES: 1.

Art3mis 129,000 2.

Parzival 110,000 3.

Aech 108,000 4.

Daito 107,000 5.

Shoto 106,000 6.

IOI-655321 105,000 7.

IOI-643187 105,000 8.

IOI-621671 105,000 9.

IOI-678324 105,000 10.

IOI-637330 105,000 You've got no one but yourself to blame, I told myself.

You let success go to your head.

You slacked off on your research.

What, did you think lightning would strike twice?

That eventually you'd just stumble across the clue you needed to find the Jade Key?

Sitting in first place all that time gave you a false sense of security.

But you don't have that problem now, do you, asshead?

No, because instead of buckling down and focusing on your quest like you should have, you pissed away your lead.

You wasted almost half a year screwing around and pining over some girl you've never even met in person.

The girl who dumped you.

The same girl who is going to end up beating you.

Now ...

get your head back in the game, moron.

Find that key.

Suddenly, I wanted to win the contest more than ever.

Not just for the money.

I wanted to prove myself to Art3mis.

And I wanted the Hunt to be over, so that she would talk to me again.

So that I could finally meet her in person, see her true face, and try to make sense of how I felt about her.

I cleared the Scoreboard off my display and opened up my grail diary, which had now grown into a vast mountain of data containing every scrap of information I'd collected since the contest began.

It appeared as a jumble of cascading windows floating in front of me, displaying text, maps, photos, and audio and video files, all indexed, cross-referenced, and pulsing with life.

I kept the Quatrain open in a window that was always on top.

Four lines of text.

Twenty-four words.

Thirty-four syllables.

I'd stared at them so often and for so long that they'd nearly lost all meaning.

Looking at them again now, I had to resist the urge to scream in rage and frustration.

The captain conceals the Jade Key in a dwelling long neglected But you can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected I knew the answer was right there in front of me.

Art3mis had already figured it out.

I read over my notes about John Draper, aka Captain Crunch, and the toy plastic whistle that had made him famous in the annals of hacker lore.

I still believed that these were the "captain"

and "whistle"

Halliday was referring to.

But the rest of the Quatrain's meaning remained a mystery.

But now I possessed a new piece of information-the key was somewhere in Sector Seven.

So I pulled up my OASIS atlas and began to search for planets with names I thought might somehow be related to the Quatrain.

I found a few worlds named after famous hackers, like Woz and Mitnick, but none named after John Draper.

Sector Seven also contained hundreds of worlds named after old Usenet newsgroups, and on one of these, the planet alt.phreaking, there was a statue of Draper posing with an ancient rotary phone in one hand and a Cap'n Crunch whistle in the other.

But the statue had been erected three years after Halliday's death, so I knew it was a dead end.

I read through the Quatrain yet again, and this time the last two lines jumped out at me: But you can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected Trophies.

Somewhere in Sector Seven.

I needed to find a collection of trophies in Sector Seven.

I did a quick search of my files on Halliday.

From what I could tell, the only trophies he'd ever owned were the five Game Designer of the Year awards he'd won back around the turn of the century.

These trophies were still on display in the GSS Museum in Columbus, but there were replicas of them on display inside the OASIS, on a planet called Archaide.

And Archaide was located in Sector Seven.

The connection seemed thin, but I still wanted to check it out.

At the very least, it would make me feel like I was doing something productive for the next few hours.

I glanced over at Max, who was currently doing the samba on one of my command center's monitors.

"Max, prep the Vonnegut for takeoff.

If you're not too busy."

Max stopped dancing and smirked at me.

"You got it, El Comanchero!"

I got up and walked over to my stronghold's elevator, which I'd modeled after the turbolift on the original Star Trek series.

I rode down four levels to my armory, a massive vault filled with storage shelves, display cases, and weapon racks.

I pulled up my avatar's inventory display, which appeared as a classic "paper doll"

diagram of my avatar, onto which I could drag and drop various items and pieces of equipment.

Archaide was located in a PvP zone, so I decided to upgrade my gear and wear my Sunday best.

I put on my gleaming +10 Hale Mail powered armor, then strapped on my favorite set of blaster pistols and slung a pump-action pistol-grip shotgun across my back, along with a +5 Vorpal Bastard Sword.

I also grabbed a few other essential items.

An extra pair of antigrav boots.

A Ring of Magic Resistance.

An Amulet of Protection.

Some Gauntlets of Giant Strength.

I hated the idea of needing something and not having it with me, so I usually ended up carrying enough equipment for three gunters.

When I ran out of room on my avatar's body, I stored the additional gear in my Backpack of Holding.

Once I was properly outfitted, I hopped back on the elevator, and a few seconds later I arrived at the entrance of my hangar, located on the bottom level of my stronghold.

Pulsing blue lights lined the runway, which ran up the center of the hangar to a massive pair of armored doors at the far end.

These doors opened into the launch tunnel, which led up to a matching set of armored doors set into the asteroid's surface.

Standing on the left side of the runway was my battle-worn X-wing fighter.

Parked on the right side was my DeLorean.

Sitting on the runway itself was my most frequently used spacecraft, the Vonnegut.

Max had already powered up the engines, and they emitted a low, steady roar that filled the hangar.

The Vonnegut was a heavily modified Firefly-class transport vessel, modeled after the Serenity in the classic Firefly TV series.

The ship had been named the Kaylee when I'd first obtained it, but I'd immediately rechristened it after one of my favorite twentieth-century novelists.

Its new name was stenciled on the side of its battered gray hull.

I'd looted the Vonnegut from a cadre of Oviraptor clansmen who had foolishly attempted to hijack my X-wing while I was cruising through a large group of worlds in Sector Eleven known as the Whedonverse.

The Oviraptors were cocky bastards with no clue who it was they were messing with.

I was in a foul mood even before they'd opened fire on me.

Otherwise, I probably would have just evaded them by jumping to light speed.

But that day I decided to take their attack personally.

Ships were like most other items in the OASIS.

Each one had specific attributes, weapons, and speed capabilities.

My X-wing was far more maneuverable than the Oviraptors' large transport ship, so it was no trouble for me to avoid the barrage from their aftermarket guns, while I bombarded them with laser bolts and proton torpedoes.

After I disabled their engines, I boarded the ship and proceeded to kill every avatar there.

The captain tried to apologize when he saw who I was, but I wasn't in a forgiving mood.

After I'd dispatched the crew, I parked my X-wing in the cargo hold and then cruised home in my new ship.

As I approached the Vonnegut, the loading ramp extended to the hangar floor.

By the time I reached the cockpit, the ship was already lifting off.

I heard the landing gear retract with a thud just as I seated myself at the controls.

"Max, lock up the house, and set a course for Archaide."

"Aye, C-c-captain,"

Max stuttered from one of the cockpit monitors.

The hangar doors slid open, and the Vonnegut rocketed out the launch tunnel and up into the starry sky.

As the ship cleared the surface, the armored tunnel doors slammed closed behind it.

I spotted several ships camped out in a high orbit above Falco.

The usual suspects: crazed fans, wannabe disciples, and aspiring bounty hunters.

A few of them, the ones currently turning to follow me, were tagalongs-people who spent most of their time trying to tail prominent gunters and gather intel on their movements so they could sell the information later.

I was always able to lose these idiots by jumping to light speed.

A lucky thing for them.

If I couldn't lose someone who was trying to tail me, I usually had no choice but to stop and kill them.

As the Vonnegut made the jump to light speed, each of the planets on my viewscreen became a long streak of light.

"Li-li-light speed engaged, Captain,"

Max reported.

"ETA to Archaide is estimated at fifty-three minutes.

Fifteen if you want to use the nearest stargate."

Stargates were strategically located throughout each sector.

They were really just giant spaceship-sized teleporters, but since they charged by the mass of your ship and the distance you wanted to travel, they were normally used only by corporations or extremely wealthy avatars with credits to burn.

I was neither, but under the circumstances, I was willing to splurge a little.

"Let's take the stargate, Max.

We're in kind of a hurry."

The Vonnegut dropped out of light speed, and Archaide suddenly filled the cockpit viewscreen.

It stood out from the other planets in the area because it wasn't coded to look real.

All of the neighboring planets were perfectly rendered, with clouds, continents, or impact craters covering their curved surfaces.

But Archaide had none of these features, because it was home to the OASIS's largest classic videogame museum, and its appearance had been designed as a tribute to the vector-graphic games of the late '70s and early '80s.

The planet's only surface feature was a web of glowing green dots similar to the ground lights on an airport runway.

They were spaced evenly across the globe in a perfect grid, so that, from orbit, Archaide resembled the vector-graphic Death Star from Atari's 1983 Star Wars arcade game.

As Max piloted the Vonnegut down to the surface, I prepared for the possibility of combat by charging up my armor and buffing my avatar with several potions and nano packs.

Archaide was both a PvP zone and a chaos zone, which meant that both magic and technology functioned here.

So I made sure to load up all of my combat contingency macros.

The Vonnegut's perfectly rendered steel loading ramp lowered to the ground, standing out in sharp contrast against the digital blackness of Archaide's surface.

As I stepped off the ramp, I tapped a keypad on my right wrist.

The ramp retracted, and there was a sharp hum as the ship's security system activated.

A transparent blue shield appeared around the Vonnegut's hull.

I gazed around at the horizon, which was just a jagged green vector line, denoting mountainous terrain.

Here on the surface, Archaide looked exactly like the environment of the 1981 game Battlezone, another vector-graphic classic from Atari.

In the distance, a triangular volcano spewed green pixels of lava.

You could run toward that volcano for days and never reach it.

It always remained at the horizon.

Just like in an old videogame, the scenery never changed on Archaide, even if you circumnavigated the globe.

Following my instructions, Max had set the Vonnegut down in a landing lot near the equator in the eastern hemisphere.

The lot was empty, and the surrounding area appeared deserted.

I headed toward the nearest green dot.

As I approached, I could see that it was actually the mouth of an entrance tunnel, a neon green circle ten meters in diameter leading belowground.

Archaide was a hollow planet, and the museum exhibits were all located beneath the surface.

As I approached the nearest tunnel entrance, I heard loud music emanating from below.

I recognized the song as "Pour Some Sugar on Me"

by Def Leppard, off their Hysteria album (Epic Records, 1987).

I reached the edge of the glowing green ring and jumped in.

As my avatar plummeted down into the museum, the green vector-graphic theme disappeared and I found myself in high-resolution full-color surroundings.

Everything around me looked completely real once again.

Below its surface, Archaide housed thousands of classic video arcades, each one a loving re-creation of an actual arcade that had once existed somewhere in the real world.

Since the dawn of the OASIS, thousands of elderly users had come here and painstakingly coded virtual replicas of local arcades they remembered from their childhood, thus making them a permanent part of the museum.

And each of these simulated game rooms, bowling alleys, and pizza joints was lined with classic arcade games.

There was at least one copy of every coin-operated videogame ever made down here.

The original game ROMs were all stored in the planet's OASIS code, and their wooden game cabinets were each coded to look like the antique originals.

Hundreds of shrines and exhibits devoted to various game designers and publishers were also scattered throughout the museum.

The museum's various levels were comprised of vast caverns linked by a network of subterranean streets, tunnels, staircases, elevators, escalators, ladders, slides, trapdoors, and secret passageways.

It was like a massive underground multilevel labyrinth.

The layout made it extremely easy to get lost, so I kept a three-dimensional holographic map on my display.

My avatar's present location was indicated by a flashing blue dot.

I'd entered the museum next to an old arcade called Aladdin's Castle, close to the surface.

I touched a point on the map near the core of the planet, indicating my destination, and the software mapped the quickest route for me to get there.

I ran forward, following it.

The museum was divided into layers.

Here, near the planet's mantle, you could find the last coin-operated videogames ever made, from the first few decades of the twenty-first century.

These were mostly dedicated simulator cabinets with first-generation haptics-vibrating chairs and tilting hydraulic platforms.

Lots of networked stock car simulators that allowed people to race each other.

These games were the last of their kind.

By that era, home videogame consoles had already made most coin-op games obsolete.

After the OASIS went online, they stopped making them altogether.

As you ventured deeper into the museum, the games grew older and more archaic.

Turn-of-the-century coin-ops.

Lots of head-to-head fighting games with blocky polygon-rendered figures beating the crap out of each other on large flat- screen monitors.

Shooting games played with crude haptic light guns.

Dancing games.

Once you reached the level below that, the games all began to look identical.

Each was housed in a large rectangular wooden box containing a cathode picture tube with a set of crude game controls mounted in front of it.

You used your hands and your eyes (and occasionally your feet) to play these games.

There were no haptics.

These games didn't make you feel anything.

And the deeper I descended, the cruder the game graphics got.

The museum's bottom level, located in the planet core, was a spherical room containing a shrine to the very first videogame, Tennis for Two, invented by William Higinbotham in 1958.

The game ran on an ancient analog computer and was played on a tiny oscilloscope screen about five inches in diameter.

Next to it was a replica of an ancient PDP-1 computer running a copy of Spacewar!, the second videogame ever made, created by a bunch of students at MIT in 1962.

Like most gunters, I'd already visited Archaide a few times.

I'd been to the core and had played both Tennis for Two and Spacewar!

until I'd mastered them.

Then I'd wandered around the museums' many levels, playing games and looking for clues Halliday might have left behind.

But I'd never found anything.

I kept running, farther and farther down, until I reached the Gregarious Simulation Systems Museum, which was located just a few levels above the planet core.

I'd been here once before too, so I knew my way around.

There were exhibits devoted to all of GSS's most popular games, including several arcade ports of titles they'd originally released for home computers and consoles.

It didn't take me long to find the exhibit where Halliday's five Game Designer of the Year trophies were displayed, next to a bronze statue of the man himself.

Within a few minutes, I knew I was wasting my time here.

The GSS Museum exhibit was coded so that it was impossible to remove any of the items on display, so the trophies could not be "collected."

I spent a few minutes trying in vain to cut one of them free of its pedestal with a laser welding torch before calling it quits.

Another dead end.

This whole trip had been a waste of time.

I took one last look around and headed for the exit, trying not to let my frustration get the best of me.

I decided to take a different route on my way back up to the surface, through a section of the museum I'd never fully explored on my previous visits.

I wandered through a series of tunnels that led me into a giant, cavernous chamber.

It contained a kind of underground city comprised entirely of pizza joints, bowling alleys, convenience stores, and, of course, video arcades.

I wandered through the maze of empty streets, then down a winding back alley that dead-ended by the entrance of a small pizza shop.

I froze in my tracks when I saw the name of the place.

It was called Happytime Pizza, and it was a replica of a small family-run pizza joint that had existed in Halliday's hometown in the mid-1980s.

Halliday appeared to have copied the code for Happytime Pizza from his Middletown simulation and hidden a duplicate of it here in the Archaide museum.

What the hell was it doing here?

I'd never seen its existence mentioned on any of the gunter message boards or strategy guides.

Was it possible no one had ever spotted it before now?

Halliday mentioned Happytime Pizza several times in the Almanac, so I knew he had fond memories of this place.

He'd often come here after school, to avoid going home.

The interior re-created the atmosphere of a classic '80s pizza parlor and video arcade in loving detail.

Several NPC employees stood behind the counter, tossing dough and slicing pies.

(I turned on my Olfatrix tower and discovered that I could actually smell the tomato sauce.) The shop was divided into two halves, the game room and the dining room.

The dining room had videogames in it as well-all of the glass-top tables were actually sit-down arcade games known as "cocktail cabinets."

You could sit and play Donkey Kong on the table while you ate your pizza.

If I'd been hungry, I could have ordered a real slice of pizza at the counter.

The order would have been forwarded to a pizza vendor near my apartment complex, the one I'd specified in my OASIS account's food service preference settings.

Then a slice would have been delivered to my door in a matter of minutes, and the cost (including tip) would have been deducted from my OASIS account balance.

As I walked into the game room, I heard a Bryan Adams song blasting out of the speakers mounted on the carpeted walls.

Bryan was singing about how, everywhere he went, the kids wanted to rock.

I pressed my thumb to a plate on the change machine and bought a single quarter.

I scooped it out of the stainless- steel tray and headed to the back of the game room, taking in all of the simulation's little details.

I spotted a handwritten note taped to the marquee of a Defender game.

It read BEAT THE OWNER'S HIGH SCORE AND WIN A FREE LARGE PIZZA!

A Robotron game was currently displaying its high-score list.

Robotron allowed its all-time best player to enter an entire sentence of text beside their score instead of just their initials, and this machine's top dog had used his precious victory space to announce that Vice-Principal Rundberg is a total douchebag!

I continued farther into the dark electronic cave and walked up to a Pac-Man machine at the very back of the room, wedged between a Galaga and a Dig Dug.

The black-and-yellow cabinet was covered with chips and scratches, and the garish side-art was peeling.

The Pac-Man game's monitor was dark, and there was an OUT OF ORDER sign taped to it.

Why would Halliday include a broken game in this simulation?

Was this just another atmospheric detail?

Intrigued, I decided to investigate further.

I pulled the game cabinet out from the wall and saw that the power cord was unplugged.

I plugged it back into the wall socket and waited for the game to boot up.

It seemed to work fine.

As I was shoving the cabinet back into place, I spotted something.

At the top of the game, resting on the metal brace that held the glass marquee in place, was a single quarter.

The date on the coin was 1981-the year Pac-Man had been released.

I knew that back in the '80s, placing your quarter on a game's marquee was how you reserved the next turn on the machine.

But when I tried to remove the quarter, it wouldn't budge.

Like it was welded in place.

Weird.

I slapped the OUT OF ORDER sign on the neighboring Galaga cabinet and looked at the start-up screen, which was listing off the game's villainous ghosts: Inky, Blinky, Pinky, and Clyde.

The high score at the top of the screen was 3,333,350 points.

Several things were strange about this.

In the real world, Pac-Man machines didn't save their high score if they were unplugged.

And the high-score counter was supposed to flip over at 1,000,000 points.

But this machine displayed a high score of 3,333,350 points-just 10 points shy of the highest Pac-Man score possible.

The only way to beat that score would be to play a perfect game.

I felt my pulse quicken.

I'd uncovered something here.

Some sort of Easter egg, hidden inside this old coin-op videogame.

It wasn't the Easter egg.

Just an Easter egg.

Some sort of challenge or puzzle, one I was almost certain had been created and placed here by Halliday.

I didn't know if it had anything to do with the Jade Key.

It might not be related to the egg at all.

But there was only one way to find out.

I would have to play a perfect game of Pac-Man.

This was no easy feat.

You had to play all 256 levels perfectly, all the way up to the final split-screen.

And you had to eat every single dot, energizer, fruit, and ghost possible along the way, without ever losing a single life.

Less than twenty perfect games had been documented in the game's sixty-year history.

One of them, the fastest perfect game ever played, had been accomplished by James Halliday in just under four hours.

He'd done it on an original Pac-Man machine located in the Gregarious Games break room.

Because I knew Halliday loved the game, I'd already done a fair amount of research on Pac-Man.

But I'd never managed to play a perfect game.

Of course, I'd never really made a serious attempt.

Up until now, I'd never had a reason to.

I opened my grail diary and pulled up all of the Pac-Manrelated data I'd ever collected.

The original game code.

The unabridged biography of the designer, Toru Iwatani.

Every Pac-Man strategy guide ever written.

Every episode of the Pac-Man cartoon series.

The ingredients for Pac-Man cereal.

And, of course, patterns.

I had Pac-Man pattern diagrams out the wazoo, along with hundreds of hours of archived video of the best Pac-Man players in history.

I'd already studied a lot of this stuff, but I skimmed over it again now to refresh my memory.

Then I closed my grail diary and studied the Pac-Man machine in front of me, like a gunfighter sizing up an opponent.

I stretched my arms, rolled my head and neck around on my shoulders, and cracked my knuckles.

When I dropped a quarter into the left coin slot, the game emitted a familiar electronic bea-wup!

sound.

I tapped the Player One button, and the first maze appeared on the screen.

I wrapped my right hand around the joystick and began to play, guiding my pizza-shaped protagonist through one maze after another.

Wakka-wakka-wakka- wakka.

My synthetic surroundings faded away as I focused on the game and lost myself in its ancient two-dimensional reality.

Just as with Dungeons of Daggorath, I was now playing a simulation within a simulation.

A game within a game.

I had several false starts.

I would play for an hour, or even two; then I'd make one tiny mistake and I'd have to reboot the machine and start all over.

But I was now on my eighth attempt, and I'd been playing for six hours straight.

I was rockin' like Dokken.

This game had been Iceman-perfect so far.

Two-hundred and fifty-five screens in and I still hadn't made a single mistake.

I'd managed to nail all four ghosts with every single power pill (until the eighteenth maze, when they stop turning blue altogether), and I'd snagged every bonus fruit, bird, bell, and key that had appeared, without dying once.

I was having the best game of my life.

This was it.

I could feel it.

Everything was finally falling in to place.

I had the glow.

There was a spot in each maze, just above the starting position, where it was possible to "hide"

Pac-Man for up to fifteen minutes.

In that location, the ghosts couldn't find him.

Using this trick, I'd been able to take two quick food and bathroom breaks during the past six hours.

As I chomped my way through the 255th screen, the song "Pac-Man Fever"

began to blast out of the game room stereo.

A smile crept onto my face.

I knew this had to be a small tip-of-the-hat from Halliday.

Sticking to my tried-and-true pattern one last time, I whipped the joystick right, slid into the secret door, then out the opposite side and straight down to snag the last few remaining dots, clearing the board.

I took a deep breath as the outline of the blue maze began to pulse white.

And then I saw it, staring me in the face.

The fabled split-screen.

The end of the game.

Then, in the worst case of bad timing imaginable, a Scoreboard alert flashed on my display, just a few seconds after I began to play through the final screen.

The top ten rankings appeared, superimposed over my view of the Pac-Man screen, and I glanced at them just long enough to see that Aech had now become the second person to find the Jade Key.

His score had just jumped 19,000 points, putting him in second place and knocking me into third.

By some miracle, I managed not to flip out.

I stayed focused on my Pac-Man game.

I gripped the joystick tighter, refusing to let this wreck my concentration.

I was nearly finished!

I only had to milk the final 6,760 possible points from this last garbled maze and then I would finally have the high score.

My heart pounded in time with the music as I cleared the unblemished left half of the maze.

Then I ventured into the twisted terrain of the right half, guiding Pac-Man through the pixelated on-screen refuse of the game's depleted memory.

Hidden underneath all of those junk sprites and garbled graphics were nine more dots, worth ten points each.

I couldn't see them, but I had their locations memorized.

I quickly found and ate all nine, gaining 90 more points.

Then I turned and ran into the nearest ghost-Clyde-and committed Pacicide, dying for the first time in the game.

Pac-Man froze and withered into nothingness with an extended beeewup.

Each time Pac-Man died on this final maze, the nine hidden dots reappeared on the deformed right half of the screen.

So to achieve the game's maximum possible score, I had to find and eat each of those dots five more times, once with each of my five remaining lives.

I did my best not to think about Aech, who I knew must be holding the Jade Key at that very moment.

Right now, he was probably reading whatever clue was etched into its surface.

I pulled the joystick to the right, weaving through the digital debris one final time.

I could have done it blindfolded by now.

I fish-hooked around Pinky to grab the two dots near the bottom, then another three in the center, and then the last four near the top.

I'd done it.

I had the new high score: 3,333,360 points.

A perfect game.

I took my hands off the controls and watched as all four ghosts converged on Pac-Man.

GAME OVER flashed in the center of the maze.

I waited.

Nothing happened.

After a few seconds, the game's attract screen came back up, showing the four ghosts, their names, and their nicknames.

My gaze shot to the quarter sitting on the edge of the marquee brace.

Earlier it had been welded in place, unmovable.

But now it tumbled forward and fell end- over-end, landing directly in the palm of my avatar's hand.

Then it vanished, and a message flashed on my display informing me that the quarter had automatically been added to my inventory.

When I tried to take it back out and examine it, I found that I couldn't.

The quarter icon remained in my inventory.

I couldn't take it out or drop it.

If the quarter had any magical properties, they weren't revealed in its item description, which was completely empty.

To learn anything more about the quarter, I would have to cast a series of high-level divination spells on it.

That would take days and require a lot of expensive spell components, and even then there was no guarantee the spells would tell me anything.

But at the moment, I was having a hard time caring all that much about the mystery of the undroppable quarter.

All I could think about was that Aech and Art3mis had now both beaten me to the Jade Key.

And getting the high score on this Pac-Man game on Archaide obviously hadn't gotten me any closer to finding it myself.

I really had been wasting my time here.

I headed back up to the planet's surface.

Just as I was sitting down in the Vonnegut's cockpit, an e-mail from Aech arrived in my inbox.

I felt my pulse quicken when I saw its subject line: Payback Time.

Holding my breath, I opened the message and read it: Dear Parzival, You and I are officially even now, got that?

I consider my debt to you hereby paid in full.

Better hurry.

The Sixers must already be on their way there.

Good luck, Aech Below his signature was an image file he'd attached to the message.

It was a high-resolution scan of the instruction manual cover for the text adventure game Zork-the version released in 1980 by Personal Software for the TRS-80 Model III.

I'd played and solved Zork once, a long time ago, back during the first year of the Hunt.

But I'd also played hundreds of other classic text adventure games that year, including all of Zork's sequels, and so most of the details of the game had now faded in my memory.

Most old text adventure games were pretty self- explanatory, so I'd never actually bothered to read the Zork instruction manual.

I now knew that this had a been a colossal mistake.

On the manual's cover was a painting depicting a scene from the game.

A swashbuckling adventurer wearing armor and a winged helmet stood with a glowing blue sword raised over his head, preparing to strike a troll cowering before him.

The adventurer clutched several treasures in his other hand, and more treasures lay at his feet, scattered among human bones.

A dark, fanged creature lurked just behind the hero, glowering malevolently.

All of this was in the painting's foreground, but my eyes had instantly locked on what was in the background: a large white house, with its front door and windows all boarded up.

A dwelling long neglected.

I stared at the image a few more seconds, just long enough to curse myself for not making the connection on my own, months ago.

Then I fired the Vonnegut's engines and set a course for another planet in Sector Seven, not far from Archaide.

It was small world called Frobozz that was home to a detailed re- creation of the game Zork.

It was also, I now knew, the hiding place of the Jade Key.

Frobozz was located in a group of several hundred rarely visited worlds known as the XYZZY Cluster.

These planets all dated back to the early days of the OASIS, and each one re-created the environment of some classic text adventure game or MUD (multi-user dungeon).

Each of these worlds was a kind of shrine-an interactive tribute to the OASIS's earliest ancestors.

Text adventure games (often referred to as "interactive fiction"

by modern scholars) used text to create the virtual environment the player inhabited.

The game program provided you with a simple written description of your surroundings, then asked what you wanted to do next.

To move around or interact with your virtual surroundings, you keyed in text commands telling the game what you wanted your avatar to do.

These instructions had to be very simple, usually composed of just two or three words, such as "go south"

or "get sword."

If a command was too complex, the game's simple parsing engine wouldn't be able to understand it.

By reading and typing text, you made your way through the virtual world, collecting treasure, fighting monsters, avoiding traps, and solving puzzles until you finally reached the end of the game.

The first text adventure game I'd ever played was called Colossal Cave, and initially the text-only interface had seemed incredibly simple and crude to me.

But after playing for a few minutes, I quickly became immersed in the reality created by the words on the screen.

Somehow, the game's simple two-sentence room descriptions were able to conjure up vivid images in my mind's eye.

Zork was one of the earliest and most famous text adventure games.

According to my grail diary, I'd played the game through to the end just once, all in one day, over four years ago.

Since then, in a shocking display of unforgivable ignorance, I'd somehow forgotten two very important details about the game: 1.

Zork began with your character standing outside a shuttered white house.

2.

Inside the living room of that white house there was a trophy case.

To complete the game, every treasure you collected had to be returned to the living room and placed inside the trophy case.

Finally, the rest of the Quatrain made sense.

The captain conceals the Jade Key in a dwelling long neglected But you can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected Decades ago, Zork and its sequels had all been licensed and re-created inside the OASIS as stunning three-dimensional immersive simulations all located on the planet Frobozz, which was named after a character in the Zork universe.

So the dwelling long neglected-the one I'd been trying to locate for the past six months-had been sitting right out in the open on Frobozz this entire time.

Hiding in plain sight.

I checked the ship's navigational computer.

Traveling at light speed, it would take me just over fifteen minutes to reach Frobozz.

There was a good chance the Sixers would beat me there.

If they did, there would probably already be a small armada of Sixer gunships waiting in orbit around the planet when I dropped out of light speed.

I would have to fight my way through them to reach the surface, and then either lose them, or try to find the Jade Key with them still breathing down my neck.

Not a good scenario.

Luckily, I had a backup plan.

My Ring of Teleportation.

It was one of the most valuable magic items in my inventory, looted from the hoard of a red dragon I'd slain on Gygax.

The ring allowed my avatar to teleport once a month, to any location in the OASIS.

I only used it in dire emergencies as a last-ditch means of escape, or when I needed to get somewhere in a big hurry.

Like right now.

I quickly programmed the Vonnegut's onboard computer to autopilot the ship to Frobozz.

I instructed it to activate its cloaking device as soon as it dropped out of hyperspace, then locate me on the planet's surface and land somewhere nearby.

If I was lucky, the Sixers wouldn't detect my ship and blast it out of the sky before it could reach me.

If they did, I'd be stuck on Frobozz with no way to leave, while the entire Sixer army closed in on me.

I engaged the Vonnegut's autopilot, then activated my Ring of Teleportation by speaking the command word, "Brundell."

When the ring began to glow, I said the name of the planet where I wished to teleport.

A world map of Frobozz appeared on my display.

It was a large world, and like the planet Middletown, its surface was covered with hundreds of identical copies of the same simulation- in this case, re-creations of the Zork playing field.

There were 512 copies of it, to be exact, which meant there were 512 white houses, spaced out evenly across the planet's surface.

I should be able to obtain the Jade Key at any one of them, so I selected one of the copies at random on the map.

My ring emitted a blinding flash of light, and a split second later my avatar was there, standing on the surface of Frobozz.

I opened my grail diary and located my original notes on how to solve Zork.

Then I pulled up a map of the game's playing field and placed it in the corner of my display.

Surveying the skies, I didn't see any sign of the Sixers, but that didn't mean they hadn't already arrived.

Sorrento and his underlings had probably just teleported to one of the other playing fields.

Everybody knew that the Sixers had already been camped out in Sector Seven, waiting for this moment.

As soon as they saw Aech's score increase, they would have used Fyndoro's Tablet of Finding and learned that he was currently on Frobozz.

Which meant the entire Sixer armada would already be on its way here.

So I needed to get to the key as quickly as possible, then get the hell of out Dodge.

I took a look around.

My surroundings were eerily familiar.

The opening text description in the game Zork read as follows: WEST OF HOUSE You are standing in an open field west of a white house, with a boarded front door.

There is a small mailbox here.

> My avatar now stood in that open field, just west of the white house.

The front door of the old Victorian mansion was boarded up, and there was a mailbox just a few yards away from me, at the end of the walkway leading to the house.

The house was surrounded by a dense forest, and beyond it I saw a range of jagged mountain peaks.

Glancing off to my left, I spotted a path leading to the north, right where I knew it should be.

I ran around to the back of the house.

I found a small window there, slightly ajar, and I forced it open and climbed inside.

As expected, I found myself in the kitchen.

A wooden table sat in the center of the room, and on it rested a long brown sack and a bottle of water.

A chimney stood nearby, and a staircase led up to the attic.

A hallway off to my left led to the living room.

Just like the game.

But the kitchen also contained things that weren't mentioned in the game's text description of this room.

A stove, a refrigerator, several wooden chairs, a sink, and a few rows of kitchen cabinets.

I opened the fridge.

It was full of junk food.

Fossilized pizza, snack puddings, lunch meat, and a wide array of condiment packets.

I checked the cupboards.

They were filled with canned and dry goods.

Rice, pasta, soup.

And cereal.

One entire cupboard was crammed with boxes of vintage breakfast cereals, most of which had been discontinued before I'd been born.

Fruit Loops, Honeycombs, Lucky Charms, Count Chocula, Quisp, Frosted Flakes.

And hidden way at the back was a lone box of Cap'n Crunch.

Printed clearly on the front of it were the words FREE TOY WHISTLE INSIDE!

The captain conceals the Jade Key.

I dumped the contents of the box out on the counter, scattering golden cereal nuggets everywhere.

Then I spotted it-a small plastic whistle encased in a clear cellophane envelope.

I tore off the cellophane and held the whistle in my hand.

It was yellow in color, with the cartoon face of Cap'n Crunch molded on one side and a small dog on the other.

The words CAP'N CRUNCH BO'SUN WHISTLE were embossed on either side.

I raised the whistle to my avatar's lips and blew into it.

But the whistle emitted no sound, and nothing happened.

You can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected.

I pocketed the whistle and opened the sack on the kitchen table.

I saw a clove of garlic inside, and I added it to my inventory.

Then I ran west, into the living room.

The floor was covered with a large Oriental rug.

Antique furniture, the kind I'd seen in films from the 1940s, was positioned around the room.

A wooden door with odd characters carved into its surface was set into the west wall.

And against the opposite wall there was a beautiful glass trophy case.

It was empty.

A battery-powered lantern sat on top of the case, and a shining sword was mounted on the wall directly above it.

I took the sword and the lantern, then rolled up the Oriental rug, uncovering the trapdoor I already knew was hidden underneath.

I opened it, revealing a staircase that led down into a darkened cellar.

I turned on the lamp.

As I descended the staircase, my sword began to glow.

I continued to refer to the Zork notes in my grail diary, which reminded me exactly how to make my way through the game's labyrinth of rooms, passageways, and puzzles.

I collected all nineteen of the game's treasures as I went, returning repeatedly to the living room in the white house to place them in the trophy case, a few at a time.

Along the way, I had to do battle with several NPCs: a troll, a Cyclops, and a really annoying thief.

As for the legendary grue, lurking in the dark, waiting to dine on my flesh-I simply avoided him.

Aside from the Cap'n Crunch whistle hidden in the kitchen, I found no surprises or deviations from the original game.

To solve this immersive three- dimensional version of Zork, I simply had to perform the exact same actions required to solve the original text-based game.

By running at top speed and by never stopping to sightsee or second-guess myself, I managed to complete the game in twenty-two minutes.

Shortly after I collected the last of the game's nineteen treasures, a tiny brass bauble, a notice flashed in my display informing me that the Vonnegut had arrived outside.

The autopilot had just landed the ship in the field to the west of the white house.

Its cloaking device was still engaged and its shields were up.

If the Sixers were already here, in orbit around the planet, I was hoping they hadn't spotted my ship.

I ran back to the living room of the white house one last time and placed the final treasure inside the trophy case.

Just as in the original game, a map appeared inside the case, directing me to a hidden barrow that marked the end of the game.

But I wasn't concerned with the map or with finishing the game.

All of the "trophies"

were now "collected"

in the case, so I took out the Cap'n Crunch whistle.

It had three holes across the top, and I covered the third one to generate the 2600-hertz tone that had made this whistle famous in the annals of hacker history.

Then I blew one clear, shrill note.

The whistle transformed into a small key, and my score on the scoreboard increased by 18,000 points.

I was back in second place, a mere 1,000 points ahead of Aech.

A second later, the entire Zork simulation reset itself.

The nineteen items in the trophy case vanished, returning to their original locations, and the rest of the house and the game's playing field returned to the same state in which I'd found them.

As I stared at the key in the palm of my hand, I felt a brief jolt of panic.

The key was silver, not the milky green color of jade.

But when I turned the key over and examined it more closely, I saw that it actually appeared to be wrapped in silver foil, like a stick of gum or a bar of chocolate.

I carefully peeled the wrapper away, and a key made of polished green stone was revealed inside.

The Jade Key.

And just like the Copper Key, I saw that it had a clue etched into its surface: Continue your quest by taking the test I reread it several times, but had no immediate revelations as to its meaning, so I placed the key in my inventory, then examined the wrapper.

It was silver foil on one side and white paper on the other.

I didn't see any markings on either side.

Just then, I heard the muffled roar of approaching spacecraft and knew it must be the Sixers.

It sounded like they were here in force.

I pocketed the wrapper and ran out of the house.

Overhead, thousands of Sixer gunships filled the sky like an angry swarm of metal wasps.

The ships were separating into small groups as they descended, heading off in different directions, as if to blanket the entire surface of the planet.

I didn't think the Sixers would be foolish enough to try to barricade all 512 instances of the white house.

That strategy had worked for them on Ludus, but only for a few hours, and they'd only had one location to barricade.

The entire planet of Frobozz was in a PvP zone, and both magic and technology functioned here, which meant that all bets were off.

There would be hordes of gunters arriving here soon, armed to the teeth, and if the Sixers tried to keep all of them at bay, it would mean war on a scale never before seen in the history of the OASIS.

As I continued running across the field and up the ramp of my ship, I spotted a large squadron of gunships, about a hundred or so, descending from the sky directly above my location.

They appeared to be headed straight for me.

Max had already powered up the Vonnegut's engines, so I shouted for him to lift off as soon as I was aboard.

When I reached the cockpit controls, I threw the throttle wide open, and the descending swarm of Sixer gunships banked hard to follow me.

As my ship blasted its way skyward, I began to take heavy fire from several directions.

But I was lucky.

My ship was fast, and my shields were top- of-the-line, so they managed to hold up long enough for me to reach orbit.

But they failed a few seconds later, and the Vonnegut's hull suffered an alarming amount of damage in the handful of seconds it took me to make the jump to light speed.

It was a close call.

The bastards almost got me.

My ship was in bad shape, so instead of returning directly to my stronghold, I headed to Joe's Garage, an orbital starship repair shop over in Sector Ten.

Joe's was an honest NPC-operated establishment, with reasonable rates and lightning- fast service.

I used them whenever the Vonnegut needed repairs or upgrades.

While Joe and his boys worked on my ship, I sent Aech a brief e-mail to say thanks.

I told him that whatever debt he felt he owed me was now most definitely paid in full.

I also copped to being a colossally insensitive, self- centered asshole and begged him to forgive me.

As soon as the repairs to my ship were finished, I headed back to my stronghold.

Then I spent the rest of the day glued to the newsfeeds.

The word about Frobozz was out, and every gunter with the means had already teleported there.

Thousands of others were arriving by spacecraft every minute, to do battle with the Sixers and secure their own copy of the Jade Key.

The newsfeeds were airing live coverage of the hundreds of large-scale battles breaking out on Frobozz, around nearly every instance of the "dwelling long neglected."

The big gunter clans had once again banded together to launch a coordinated attack on the Sixers' forces.

It was the beginning of what would come to be known as the Battle of Frobozz, and casualties were already mounting on both sides.

I also kept a close eye on the Scoreboard, waiting to see evidence that the Sixers had begun to collect copies of the Jade Key while their forces held the opposition at bay.

As I feared, the next score to increase was the one beside Sorrento's IOI employee number.

It jumped 17,000 points, moving him into fourth place.

Now that the Sixers knew exactly where and how to obtain the Jade Key, I expected to see their other avatars' scores begin to jump as Sorrento's underlings followed his lead.

But to my surprise, the next avatar to snag the Jade Key was none other than Shoto.

He did it less than twenty minutes after Sorrento.

Somehow, Shoto had managed to evade the hordes of Sixers currently swarming all over the planet, enter an instance of the white house, collect all nineteen of the required treasures, and obtain his copy of the key.

I continued to watch the Scoreboard, expecting to see his brother Daito's score increase as well.

But that never happened.

Instead, a few minutes after Shoto obtained his copy of the key, Daito's name disappeared from the Scoreboard entirely.

There was only one possible explanation: Daito had just been killed.

Over the next twelve hours, chaos continued to reign on Frobozz as every gunter in the OASIS scrambled to reach the planet and join the fray.

The Sixers had dispersed their grand army across the globe in a bold attempt to blockade all 512 copies of the Zork playing field.

But their forces, as vast and well-equipped as they were, were spread far too thin this time.

Only seven more of their avatars managed to obtain the Jade Key that day.

And when the gunter clans began their coordinated attack on the Sixers' forces, the "boobs in blue"

began to suffer heavy casualties and were forced to pull back.

Within a matter of hours, the Sixer high command decided to deploy a new strategy.

It had quickly become obvious that they wouldn't be able to maintain over five hundred different blockades or fend off the massive influx of gunters.

So they regrouped all of their forces around ten adjacent instances of the Zork playing field near the planet's south pole.

They installed powerful force shields over each of them and stationed armored battalions outside the shield walls.

This scaled-down strategy worked, and the Sixers' forces proved sufficient to hold those ten locations and prevent any other gunters from getting inside (and there wasn't much reason for other gunters to try, since over five hundred other instances of Zork now stood wide open and unprotected).

Now that the Sixers could operate undisturbed, they basically formed ten lines of avatars outside each white house and began to run them through the process of obtaining the Jade Key, one after another.

Everyone could plainly see what they were doing, because the digits beside each IOI employee number on the Scoreboard began to increase by 15,000 points.

At the same time, hundreds of gunter scores were increasing as well.

Now that the location of the Jade Key was public knowledge, deciphering the Quatrain and figuring out how to obtain the key was relatively easy.

It was there for the taking to anyone who had already cleared the First Gate.

As the Battle of Frobozz drew to a close, the rankings on the Scoreboard stood like this: HIGH SCORES: 1.

Art3mis 129,000 2.

Parzival 128,000 3.

Aech 127,000 4.

IOI-655321 122,000 5.

Shoto 122,000 6.

IOI-643187 120,000 7.

IOI-621671 120,000 8.

IOI-678324 120,000 9.

IOI-637330 120,000 10.

IOI-699423 120,000 Even though Shoto had matched Sorrento's score of 122,000 points, Sorrento had achieved that score first, which must be the reason he'd remained in the higher slot.

The relatively small point bonuses Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and I had received for being the first to reach the Copper and Jade keys were what kept our names in the hallowed "High Five"

slots.

Sorrento had now earned one of these bonuses too.

Seeing his IOI employee number above Shoto's name made me cringe.

Scrolling down, I saw that the Scoreboard was now over five thousand names long, with more being added every hour as new avatars finally managed to defeat Acererak at Joust and collect their own instance of the Copper Key.

No one on the message boards seemed to know what had happened to Daito, but the common assumption was that he'd been killed by the Sixers during the first few minutes of the Battle of Frobozz.

Rumors about exactly how he had died were running rampant, but no one had actually been witness to his demise.

Except for maybe Shoto, and he'd vanished.

I sent him a few chat requests, but got no reply.

Like me, I assumed he was focusing all of his energy on finding the Second Gate before the Sixers did.

I sat in my stronghold, staring at the Jade Key and reciting the words etched into its spine, over and over, like a maddening mantra: Continue your quest by taking the test Continue your quest by taking the test Continue your quest by taking the test Yes, but what test?

What test was I supposed to take?

The Kobayashi Maru?

The Pepsi Challenge?

Could the clue have been any more vague?

I reached under my visor and rubbed my eyes in frustration.

I decided I needed to take a break and get some sleep.

I pulled up my avatar's inventory and placed the Jade Key back inside.

As I did, I noticed the silver foil wrapper in the inventory slot beside it-the wrapper that had covered the Jade Key when it first appeared in my hand.

I knew the secret to deciphering the riddle must involve the wrapper in some way, but I still couldn't sort out how.

I wondered if it might be a reference to Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory, but then decided against it.

There hadn't been any golden ticket inside the wrapper.

It must have some other purpose or meaning.

I stared at the wrapper and pondered this until I could no longer keep my eyes open.

Then I logged out and went to sleep.

A few hours later, at 6:12 a.m.

OST, I was jolted awake by the gut-wrenching sound of my Scoreboard alarm alerting me that one of the top rankings had changed again.

Filled with a growing sense of dread, I logged in and pulled up the Scoreboard, unsure of what to expect.

Maybe Art3mis had finally cleared Gate Two?

Or perhaps Aech or Shoto had achieved that honor.

But all of their scores remained unchanged.

To my horror, I saw that it was Sorrento's score that had increased, by 200,000 points.

And two gate icons now appeared beside it.

Sorrento had just become the first person to find and clear the Second Gate.

As a result, his avatar now stood in first place, at the top of the Scoreboard.

I sat there frozen, staring at Sorrento's employee number, silently weighing the repercussions of what had just happened.

Upon exiting the gate, Sorrento would have been given a clue as to the location of the Crystal Key.

The key that would open the third and final gate.

So now the Sixers were the only ones who possessed that clue.

Which meant they were now closer to finding Halliday's Easter egg than anyone had ever been.

I suddenly felt ill, and I was also having a difficult time breathing.

I realized I must be having some sort of panic attack.

A total and complete freak-out.

A massive mental meltdown.

Whatever you want to call it.

I went a little nuts.

I tried calling Aech, but he didn't pick up.

Either he was still pissed off at me, or he had other, more pressing matters to attend to.

I was about to call Shoto, but then I remembered that his brother's avatar had just been killed.

He probably wasn't in a very receptive mood.

I considered flying to Benatar to try to get Art3mis to talk to me, but then I came to my senses.

She'd had the Jade Key in her possession for several days, and she still hadn't been able to clear the Second Gate.

Learning that the Sixers had done it in less than twenty-four hours had probably driven her into a psychotic rage.

Or maybe a catatonic stupor.

She probably didn't feel like talking to anyone right now, least of all me.

I tried calling her anyway.

As usual, she didn't answer.

I was so desperate to hear a familiar voice that I resorted to talking to Max.

In my current state, even his glib computer-generated voice was somehow comforting.

Of course, it didn't take long for Max to run out of preprogrammed replies; and when he started to repeat himself the illusion that I was talking to another person was shattered, and I felt even more alone.

You know you've totally screwed up your life when your whole world turns to shit and the only person you have to talk to is your system agent software.

I couldn't go back to sleep, so I stayed up watching the newsfeeds and scanning the gunter message boards.

The Sixer armada remained on Frobozz, and their avatars were still farming copies of the Jade Key.

Sorrento had obviously learned from his previous mistake.

Now that the Sixers alone knew the location of the Second Gate, they weren't going to be stupid enough to reveal its location to the world by trying to barricade it with their armada.

But they were still taking full advantage of the situation.

As the day progressed, the Sixers continued to walk additional avatars through the Second Gate.

After Sorrento made it through, another ten Sixers cleared it during the following twenty-four hours.

As each Sixer score increased by 200,000 points, Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and I were all pushed farther and farther down the Scoreboard until we'd been knocked out of the top ten entirely, and the Scoreboard's main page displayed nothing but IOI employee numbers.

The Sixers now ruled the roost.

Then, when I was sure things couldn't possibly get any worse, they did.

They got much, much worse.

Two days after he cleared the Second Gate, Sorrento's score jumped another 30,000 points, indicating that he had just acquired the Crystal Key.

I sat there in my stronghold, staring at the monitors, watching all of this unfold in stunned horror.

There was no denying it.

The end of the contest was at hand.

And it wasn't going to end like I'd always thought it would, with some noble, worthy gunter finding the egg and winning the prize.

I'd been kidding myself for the past five and a half years.

We all had.

This story was not going to have a happy ending.

The bad guys were going to win.

I spent the next twenty-four hours in a frantic funk, obsessively checking the Scoreboard every five seconds, expecting the end to come at any moment.

Sorrento, or one of his many "Halliday experts,"

had obviously been able to decipher the riddle and locate the Second Gate.

But even though the proof was right there on the Scoreboard, I still had a hard time believing it.

Up until now, the Sixers had only made progress by tracking Art3mis, Aech, or me.

How had those same clueless asshats found the Second Gate on their own?

Maybe they'd just gotten lucky.

Or perhaps they'd discovered some new and innovative way to cheat.

How else could they have solved the riddle so quickly, when Art3mis hadn't been able to do it with several days' head start?

My brain felt like hammered Play-Doh.

I couldn't make any sense of the clue printed on the Jade Key.

I was completely out of ideas.

Even lame ones.

I didn't know what to do or where to look next.

As the night went on, the Sixers continued to acquire copies of the Crystal Key.

Each time one of their scores increased it was like a knife in my heart.

But I couldn't make myself stop checking the Scoreboard.

I was utterly transfixed.

I felt myself inching toward complete hopelessness.

My efforts over the past five years had been for nothing.

I'd foolishly underestimated Sorrento and the Sixers.

And I was about to pay the ultimate price for my hubris.

Those soulless corporate lackeys were closing in on the egg at this very moment.

I could sense it, with every fiber of my being.

I'd already lost Art3mis, and now I was going to lose the contest, too.

I'd already decided what I was going to do when it happened.

First, I would choose one of the kids in my official fan club, someone with no money and a first-level newbie avatar, and give her every item I owned.

Then I would activate the self-destruct sequence on my stronghold and sit in my command center while the whole place went up in a massive thermonuclear explosion.

My avatar would die and GAME OVER would appear in the center of my display.

Then I would rip off my visor and leave my apartment for the first time in six months.

I would ride the elevator up to the roof.

Or maybe I would even take the stairs.

Get a little exercise.

There was an arboretum on the roof of my apartment building.

I had never visited it, but I'd seen photos and admired the view via webcam.

A transparent Plexiglas barrier had been installed around the ledge to keep people from jumping, but it was a joke.

At least three determined individuals had managed to climb over it since I'd moved in.

I would sit up there and breathe the unfiltered city air for a while, feeling the wind on my skin.

Then I would scale the barrier and hurl myself over the side.

This was my current plan.

I was trying to decide what tune I should whistle as I plummeted to my death when my phone rang.

It was Shoto.

I wasn't in the mood to talk, so I let his call roll to vidmail, then watched as Shoto recorded his message.

It was brief.

He said he needed to come to my stronghold to give me something.

Something Daito had left to me in his will.

When I returned his call to arrange a meeting, I could tell Shoto was an emotional wreck.

His quiet voice was filled with pain, and the depth of his despair was apparent on the features of his avatar's face.

He seemed utterly despondent.

In even worse shape than I was.

I asked Shoto why his brother had bothered to make out a "will"

for his avatar, instead of just leaving his possessions in Shoto's care.

Then Daito could simply create a new avatar and reclaim the items his brother was holding for him.

But Shoto told me that his brother would not be creating a new avatar.

Not now, or ever.

When I asked why, he promised to explain when he saw me in person.

Max alerted me when Shoto arrived an hour or so later.

I granted his ship clearance to enter Falco's airspace and told him to park in my hangar.

Shoto's vessel was a large interplanetary trawler named the Kurosawa, modeled after a ship called the Bebop in the classic anime series Cowboy Bebop.

Daito and Shoto had used it as their mobile base of operations for as long as I'd known them.

The ship was so big that it barely fit through my hangar doors.

I was standing on the runway to greet Shoto as he emerged from the Kurosawa.

He was dressed in black mourning robes, and his face bore the same inconsolable expression I'd seen when we spoke on the phone.

"Parzival-san,"

he said, bowing low.

"Shoto-san."

I returned the bow respectfully, then stretched out my palm, a gesture he recognized from the time we'd spent questing together.

Grinning, he reached out and slipped me some skin.

But then his dark expression immediately resurfaced.

This was the first time I'd seen Shoto since the quest we'd shared on Tokusatsu (not counting those "Daisho Energy Drink"

commercials he and his brother appeared in), and his avatar seemed to be a few inches taller than I remembered.

I led him up to one of my stronghold's rarely used "sitting rooms,"

a re- creation of the living room set from Family Ties.

Shoto recognized the decor and nodded his silent approval.

Then, ignoring the furniture, he seated himself in the center of the floor.

He sat seiza-style, folding his legs under his thighs.

I did the same, positioning myself so that our avatars faced each other.

We sat in silence for a while.

When Shoto was finally ready to speak, he kept his eyes on the floor.

"The Sixers killed my brother last night,"

he said, almost whispering.

At first, I was too stunned to reply.

"You mean they killed his avatar?"

I asked, even though I could already tell that wasn't what he meant.

Shoto shook his head.

"No.

They broke into his apartment, pulled him out of his haptic chair, and threw him off his balcony.

He lived on the forty-third floor."

Shoto opened a browser window in the air beside us.

It displayed a Japanese newsfeed article.

I tapped it with my index finger, and the Mandarax software translated the text to English.

The headline was ANOTHER OTAKU SUICIDE.

The brief article below said that a young man, Toshiro Yoshiaki, age twenty-two, had jumped to his death from his apartment, located on the forty-third floor of a converted hotel in Shinjuku, Tokyo, where he lived alone.

I saw a school photo of Toshiro beside the article.

He was a young Japanese man with long, unkempt hair and bad skin.

He didn't look anything like his OASIS avatar.

When Shoto saw that I'd finished reading, he closed the window.

I hesitated a moment before asking, "Are you sure he didn't really commit suicide?

Because his avatar had been killed?"

"No,"

Shoto said.

"Daito did not commit seppuku.

I'm sure of it.

The Sixers broke into his apartment while we were engaged in combat with them on Frobozz.

That's how they were able to defeat his avatar.

By killing him, in the real world."

"I'm sorry, Shoto."

I didn't know what else to say.

I knew he was telling the truth.

"My real name is Akihide,"

he said.

"I want you to know my true name."

I smiled, then bowed, briefly pressing my forehead to the floor.

"I appreciate your trusting me with your true name,"

I said.

"My true name is Wade."

I could no longer see the point in keeping secrets.

"Thank you, Wade,"

Shoto said, returning the bow.

"You're welcome, Akihide."

He was silent for a moment; then he cleared his throat and began to talk about Daito.

The words poured out of him.

It was obvious he needed to talk to someone about what had happened.

About what he'd lost.

"Daito's real name was Toshiro Yoshiaki.

I didn't even know that until last night, until I saw the news article."

"But ...

I thought you were his brother?"

I'd always assumed that Daito and Shoto lived together.

That they shared an apartment or something.

"My relationship with Daito is difficult to explain."

He stopped to clear his throat.

"We were not brothers.

Not in real life.

Just in the OASIS.

Do you understand?

We only knew each other online.

I never actually met him."

He slowly raised his eyes to meet my gaze, to see if I was judging him.

I reached out and rested a hand on his shoulder.

"Believe me, Shoto.

I understand.

Aech and Art3mis are my two best friends, and I've never met either of them in real life either.

In fact, you are one of my closest friends too."

He bowed his head.

"Thank you."

I could tell by his voice that he was crying now.

"We're gunters,"

I said, trying to fill the awkward silence.

"We live here, in the OASIS.

For us, this is the only reality that has any meaning."

Akihide nodded.

A few moments later he continued to talk.

He told me how he and Toshiro had met, six years ago, when they were both enrolled in an OASIS support group for hikikomori, young people who had withdrawn from society and chosen to live in total isolation.

Hikikomori locked themselves in a room, read manga, and cruised the OASIS all day, relying on their families to bring them food.

There had been hikikomori in Japan since back before the turn of the century, but their number had skyrocketed after the hunt for Halliday's Easter egg began.

Millions of young men and women all over the country had locked themselves away from the world.

They sometimes called these children the "missing millions."

Akihide and Toshiro became best friends and spent almost every day hanging out together in the OASIS.

When the hunt for Halliday's Easter egg began, they'd immediately decided to join forces and search for it together.

They made a perfect team, because Toshiro was a prodigy at videogames, while the much younger Akihide was well versed in American pop culture.

Akihide's grandmother had attended school in the United States, and both of his parents had been born there, so Akihide had been raised on American movies and television, and he'd grown up learning to speak English and Japanese equally well.

Akihide and Toshiro's mutual love of samurai movies served as the inspiration for their avatars' names and appearances.

Shoto and Daito had grown so close that they were now like brothers, so when they created their new gunter identities, they decided that in the OASIS they were brothers, from that moment on.

After Shoto and Daito cleared the First Gate and became famous, they gave several interviews with the media.

They kept their identities a secret, but they did reveal that they were both Japanese, which made them instant celebrities in Japan.

They began to endorse Japanese products and had a cartoon and a live- action TV series based on their exploits.

At the height of their fame, Shoto had suggested to Daito that perhaps it was time for them to meet in person.

Daito had flown into a rage and stopped speaking to Shoto for several days.

After that, Shoto had never suggested it again.

Eventually, Shoto worked his way up to telling me how Daito's avatar had died.

The two of them had been aboard the Kurosawa, cruising between planets in Sector Seven, when the Scoreboard informed them that Aech had obtained the Jade Key.

When that happened, they knew the Sixers would use Fyndoro's Tablet of Finding to pinpoint Aech's exact location and that their ships would soon be converging on it.

In preparation for this, Daito and Shoto had spent the past few weeks planting microscopic tracking devices on the hulls of every Sixer gunship they could find.

Using these devices, they were able to follow the gunships when they all abruptly changed course and headed for Frobozz.

As soon as Shoto and Daito learned that Frobozz was the Sixers' destination, they'd easily deciphered the meaning of the Quatrain.

And by the time they reached Frobozz, just a few minutes later, they'd already figured out what they needed to do to obtain the Jade Key.

They landed the Kurosawa next to an instance of the white house that was still deserted.

Shoto ran inside to collect the nineteen treasures and get the key, while Daito remained outside to stand guard.

Shoto worked quickly, and he only had two treasures left to collect when Daito informed him by comlink that ten Sixer gunships were closing in on their location.

He told his brother to hurry and promised to hold off the enemy until Shoto had the Jade Key.

Neither of them knew if they'd have another chance to reach it.

As Shoto scrambled to get the last two treasures and place them in the trophy case, he remotely activated one of the Kurosawa's external cameras and used it to record a short video of Daito's confrontation with the approaching Sixers.

Shoto opened a window and played this video clip for me.

But he averted his eyes until it was over.

He obviously had no desire to watch it again.

On the vidfeed, I saw Daito standing alone in the field beside the white house.

A small fleet of Sixer gunships was descending out of the sky, and they began to fire their laser cannons as soon as they were within range.

A hailstorm of fiery red bolts began to rain down all around Daito.

Behind him, in the distance, I could see more Sixer gunships setting down, and each one was off-loading squadrons of power-armored ground troops.

Daito was surrounded.

The Sixers had obviously spotted the Kurosawa during its descent to the planet's surface, and they'd made killing the two samurai a priority.

Daito didn't hesitate to use the ace up his sleeve.

He pulled out the Beta Capsule, held it aloft in his right hand, and activated it.

His avatar instantly changed into Ultraman, a glowing-eyed red-and-silver alien superhero.

As his avatar transformed, he also grew to a height of 156 feet.

The Sixer ground forces closing in on him froze in their tracks, staring up in frightened awe as Ultraman Daito snatched two gunships out of the sky and smashed them together, like a giant child playing with two tiny metal toys.

He dropped the flaming wreckage to the ground and began to swat other Sixer gunships out of the sky like bothersome flies.

The ships that escaped his deadly grasp banked around and sprayed him with laser bolts and machine-gun fire, but both deflected harmlessly off his armored alien skin.

Daito let out a booming laugh that echoed across the landscape.

Then he made a cross with his arms, intersecting at the wrists.

A glowing energy beam blasted forth from his hands, vaporizing half a dozen gunships unlucky enough to fly through its path.

Daito turned and swept the beam over the Sixer ground forces around him, frying them like terrified ants under a magnifying glass.

Daito appeared to be enjoying himself immensely.

So much so that he paid little attention to the warning light embedded in the center of his chest, which had now begun to flash bright red.

This was a signal that his three minutes as Ultraman had nearly elapsed and that his power was almost depleted.

This time limit was Ultraman's primary weakness.

If Daito failed to deactivate the Beta Capsule and return to human form before his three minutes were up, his avatar would die.

But it was obvious that if he changed back into his human form right now, in the middle of the massive Sixer onslaught, he'd be killed instantly too.

And Shoto would never be able to reach the ship.

I could see the Sixer troops around Daito screaming into their comlinks for backup, and additional Sixer gunships were still arriving in droves.

Daito was blasting them out of the sky one at a time, with perfectly aimed bursts of his specium ray.

And with each blast he fired, the warning light on his chest pulsed faster.

Then Shoto emerged from the white house and told his brother via comlink that he'd acquired the Jade Key.

In that same instant, the Sixer ground forces spotted Shoto, and sensing a much easier target, they began to redirect their fire at his avatar.

Shoto made a mad dash for the Kurosawa.

When he activated the Boots of Speed he was wearing, his avatar became a barely visible blur racing across the open field.

As Shoto ran, Daito repositioned his giant form to provide him with as much cover as possible.

Still firing energy blasts, he was able to keep the Sixers at bay.

Then Daito's voice broke in on the comlink.

"Shoto!"

he shouted.

"I think someone is here!

Someone is inside-"

His voice cut off.

At the same moment, his avatar froze, as if he'd been turned to stone, and a log-out icon appeared directly over his head.

Logging out of your OASIS account while you were engaged in combat was the same thing as committing suicide.

During the log-out sequence, your avatar froze in place for sixty seconds, during which time you were totally defenseless and susceptible to attack.

The log-out sequence was designed this way to prevent avatars from using it as an easy way to escape a fight.

You had to stand your ground or retreat to a safe location before you could log out.

Daito's log-out sequence had been engaged at the worst possible moment.

As soon as his avatar froze, he began to take heavy laser and gunfire from all directions.

The red warning light on his chest began to flash faster and faster until it finally went solid red.

When that happened, Daito's giant form fell over and collapsed.

As he fell, he barely missed crushing Shoto and the Kurosawa.

As he hit the ground, his avatar's body transformed and shrank back to its normal size and appearance.

Then it began to disappear altogether, slowly fading out of existence.

When Daito's avatar vanished completely, it left behind a small pile of spinning items on the ground-everything he'd been carrying in his inventory, including the Beta Capsule.

He was dead.

I saw another blur of motion on the vidfeed as Shoto ran back to collect Daito's items.

Then he looped around and ran back aboard the Kurosawa.

The ship lifted off and blasted into orbit, taking heavy fire the entire way.

I was reminded of my own desperate escape from Frobozz.

Luckily for Shoto, his brother had wiped out most of the Sixer gunships in the vicinity, and reinforcements had yet to arrive.

Shoto was able to reach orbit and escape by making the jump to light speed.

But just barely.

The video ended and Shoto closed the window.

"How do you think the Sixers found out where he lived?"

I asked.

"I don't know,"

Shoto said.

"Daito was careful.

He covered his tracks."

"If they found him, they might be able to find you, too,"

I said.

"I know.

I've taken precautions."

"Good."

Shoto removed the Beta Capsule from his inventory and held it out to me.

"Daito would have wanted you to have this."

I held up a hand.

"No, I think you should keep it.

You might need it."

Shoto shook his head.

"I have all of his other items,"

he said.

"I don't need this.

And I don't want it."

He held the capsule out to me, insistent.

I took the artifact and examined it.

It was a small metal cylinder, silver and black in color, with a red activation button on its side.

Its size and shape reminded me of the lightsabers I owned.

But lightsabers were a dime a dozen.

I had over fifty in my collection.

There was only one Beta Capsule, and it was a far more powerful weapon.

I raised the capsule with both hands and bowed.

"Thank you, Shoto-san."

"Thank you, Parzival,"

he said, returning the bow.

"Thank you for listening."

He stood up slowly.

Everything about his body language seemed to signal defeat.

"You haven't given up yet, have you?"

I asked.

"Of course not."

He straightened his body and gave me a dark smile.

"But finding the egg is no longer my goal.

Now, I have a new quest.

A far more important one."

"And that is?"

"Revenge."

I nodded.

Then I walked over and took down one of the samurai swords mounted on the wall and presented it to Shoto.

"Please,"

I said.

"Accept this gift.

To aid you in your new quest."

Shoto took the sword and drew its ornate blade a few inches from the scabbard.

"A Masamune?"

he asked, staring at the blade in wonder.

I nodded.

"Yes.

And it's a plus-five Vorpal Blade, too."

Shoto bowed again to show his gratitude.

"Arigato."

We rode the elevator back down to my hangar in silence.

Just before he boarded his ship, Shoto turned to me.

"How long do you think it will take the Sixers to clear the Third Gate?"

he asked.

"I don't know,"

I said.

"Hopefully, long enough for us to catch up with them."

"It's not over until the fat lady is singing, right?"

I nodded.

"It's not over until it's over.

And it's not over yet."

I figured it out later that night, a few hours after Shoto left my stronghold.

I was sitting in my command center, holding the Jade Key and endlessly reciting the clue printed on its surface: "

'Continue your quest by taking the test.' "

In my other hand, I held the silver foil wrapper.

My eyes darted from the key to the wrapper and back to the key again as I tried desperately to make the connection between them.

I'd been doing this for hours, and it wasn't getting me anywhere.

I sighed and put the key away, then laid the wrapper flat on the control panel in front of me.

I carefully smoothed out all of its folds and wrinkles.

The wrapper was square in shape, six inches long on each edge.

Silver foil on one side, dull white paper on the other.

I pulled up some image-analysis software and made a high-resolution scan of both sides of the wrapper.

Then I magnified both images on my display and studied every micrometer.

I couldn't find any markings or writing anywhere, on either side of the wrapper's surface.

I was eating some corn chips at the time, so I was using voice commands to operate the image-analysis software.

I instructed it to demagnify the scan of the wrapper and center the image on my display.

As I did this, it reminded me of a scene in Blade Runner, where Harrison Ford's character, Deckard, uses a similar voice-controlled scanner to analyze a photograph.

I held up the wrapper and took another look at it.

As the virtual light reflected off its foil surface, I thought about folding the wrapper into a paper airplane and sailing it across the room.

That made me think of origami, which reminded me of another moment from Blade Runner.

One of the final scenes in the film.

And that was when it hit me.

"The unicorn,"

I whispered.

The moment I said the word "unicorn"

aloud, the wrapper began to fold on its own, there in the palm of my hand.

The square piece of foil bent itself in half diagonally, creating a silver triangle.

It continued to bend and fold itself into smaller triangles and even smaller diamond shapes until at last it formed a four- legged figure that then sprouted a tail, a head, and finally, a horn.

The wrapper had folded itself into a silver origami unicorn.

One of the most iconic images from Blade Runner.

I was already riding the elevator down to my hangar and shouting at Max to prep the Vonnegut for takeoff.

Continue your quest by taking the test.

Now I knew exactly what "test"

that line referred to, and where I needed to go to take it.

The origami unicorn had revealed everything to me.

Blade Runner was referenced in the text of Anorak's Almanac no less than fourteen times.

It had been one of Halliday's top ten all-time favorite films.

And the film was based on a novel by Philip K.

Dick, one of Halliday's favorite authors.

For these reasons, I'd seen Blade Runner over four dozen times and had memorized every frame of the film and every line of dialogue.

As the Vonnegut streaked through hyperspace, I pulled the Director's Cut of Blade Runner up in a window on my display, then jumped ahead to review two scenes in particular.

The movie, released in 1982, is set in Los Angeles in the year 2019, in a sprawling, hyper-technological future that had never come to pass.

The story follows a guy named Rick Deckard, played by Harrison Ford.

Deckard works as a "blade runner,"

a special type of cop who hunts down and kills replicants- genetically engineered beings that are almost indistinguishable from real humans.

In fact, replicants look and act so much like real humans that the only way a blade runner can spot one is by using a polygraph-like device called a Voight-Kampff machine to test them.

Continue your quest by taking the test.

Voight-Kampff machines appear in only two scenes in the movie.

Both of those take place inside the Tyrell Building, an enormous double-pyramid structure that houses the Tyrell Corporation, the company that manufactures the replicants.

Re-creations of the Tyrell Building were among the most common structures in the OASIS.

Copies of it existed on hundreds of different planets, spread throughout all twenty-seven sectors.

This was because the code for the building was included as a free built-in template in the OASIS WorldBuilder construction software (along with hundreds of other structures borrowed from various science-fiction films and television series).

So for the past twenty-five years, whenever someone used the WorldBuilder software to create a new planet inside the OASIS, they could just select the Tyrell Building from a drop-down menu and insert a copy of it into their simulation to help fill out the skyline of whatever futuristic city or landscape they were coding.

As a result, some worlds had over a dozen copies of the Tyrell Building scattered across their surfaces.

I was currently hauling ass at light speed to the closest such world, a cyberpunk- themed planet in Sector Twenty-two called Axrenox.

If my suspicion was correct, every copy of the Tyrell Building on Axrenox contained a hidden entrance into the Second Gate, through the Voight-Kampff machines located inside.

I wasn't worried about running into the Sixers, because there was no way they could have barricaded the Second Gate.

Not with thousands of copies of the Tyrell Building on hundreds of different worlds.

Once I reached Axrenox, finding a copy of the Tyrell Building took only a few minutes.

It was pretty hard to miss.

A massive pyramid-shaped structure covering several square kilometers at its base, it towered above most of the structures adjacent to it.

I zeroed in on the first instance of the building I saw and headed straight for it.

My ship's cloaking device was already engaged, and I left it activated when I set the Vonnegut down on one of the Tyrell Building's landing pads.

Then I locked the ship and activated all of its security systems, hoping they'd be enough to keep it from getting stolen until I returned.

Magic didn't function here, so I couldn't just shrink the ship and put it in my pocket, and leaving your vessel parked out in the open on a cyberpunk-themed world like Axrenox was like asking for it to get ripped off.

The Vonnegut would be a target for the first leather-clad booster gang that spotted it.

I pulled up a map of the Tyrell Building template's layout and used it to locate a roof-access elevator a short distance from the platform where I'd landed.

When I reached the elevator, I punched in the default security code on the code pad and crossed my fingers.

I got lucky.

The elevator doors hissed open.

Whoever had created this section of the Axrenox cityscape hadn't bothered to reset the security codes in the template.

I took this as a good sign.

It meant they'd probably left everything else in the template at the default setting too.

As I rode the elevator down to the 440th floor, I powered on my armor and drew my guns.

Five security checkpoints stood between the elevator and the room I needed to reach.

Unless the template had been altered, fifty NPC Tyrell security guard replicants would be standing between me and my destination.

The shooting started as soon as the elevator doors slid open.

I had to kill seven skin jobs before I could even make it out of the elevator car and into the hallway.

The next ten minutes played out like the climax of a John Woo movie.

One of the ones starring Chow Yun Fat, like Hard Boiled or The Killer.

I switched both of my guns to autofire and held down the triggers as I moved from one room to the next, mowing down every NPC in my path.

The guards returned fire, but their bullets pinged harmlessly off my armor.

I never ran out of ammo, because each time I fired a round, a new round was teleported into the bottom of the clip.

My bullet bill this month was going to be huge.

When I finally reached my destination, I punched in another code and locked the door behind me.

I knew I didn't have much time.

Klaxons were blaring throughout the building, and the thousands of NPC guards stationed on the floors below were probably already on their way up here to find me.

My footsteps echoed as I entered the room.

It was deserted except for a large owl sitting on a golden perch.

It blinked at me silently as I crossed the enormous cathedral-like room, which was a perfect re-creation of the office of the Tyrell Corporation's founder, Eldon Tyrell.

Every detail from the film had been duplicated exactly.

Polished stone floors.

Giant marble pillars.

The entire west wall was a massive floor-to-ceiling window offering a breathtaking view of the vast cityscape outside.

A long conference table stood beside the window.

Sitting on top of it was a Voight-Kampff machine.

It was about the size of a briefcase, with a row of unlabeled buttons on the front, next to three small data monitors.

When I walked up and sat down in front of the machine, it turned itself on.

A thin robotic arm extended a circular device that looked like a retinal scanner, which locked into place directly level with the pupil of my right eye.

A small bellows was built into the side of the machine, and it began to rise and fall, giving the impression that the device was breathing.

I glanced around, wondering if an NPC of Harrison Ford would appear, to ask me the same questions he asked Sean Young in the movie.

I'd memorized all of her answers, just in case.

But I waited a few seconds and nothing happened.

The machine's bellows continued to rise and fall.

In the distance, the security klaxons continued to wail.

I took out the Jade Key.

The instant I did, a panel slid open in the surface of the Voight-Kampff machine, revealing a keyhole.

I quickly inserted the Jade Key and turned it.

The machine and the key both vanished, and in their place, the Second Gate appeared.

It was a doorlike portal resting on top of the polished conference table.

Its edges glowed with the same milky jade color as the key, and just like the First Gate, it appeared to lead into a vast field of stars.

I leapt up on the table and jumped inside.

I found myself standing just inside the entrance of a seedy-looking bowling alley with disco-era decor.

The carpet was a garish pattern of green and brown swirls, and the molded plastic chairs were a faded orange color.

The bowling lanes were all empty and unlit.

The place was deserted.

There weren't even any NPCs behind the front counter or the snack bar.

I wasn't sure where I was supposed to bowling lanes.

At first, the only sound I heard was the low hum of the fluorescent lights overhead.

But then I noticed a series of faint electronic chirps emanating from off to my left.

I glanced in that direction and saw a darkened alcove just beyond the snack bar.

Over this cavelike entrance was a sign.

Eight bright red neon letters spelled out the words GAME ROOM.

There was a violent rush of wind, and the roar of what sounded like a hurricane tearing through the bowling alley.

My feet began to slide across the carpet, and I realized that my avatar was being pulled toward the game room, as if a black hole had opened up somewhere in there.

As the vacuum yanked me through the game room entrance, I spotted a dozen videogames inside, all from the mid- to late '80s.

Crime Fighters, Heavy Barrel, Vigilante, Smash TV.

But I could now see that my avatar was being drawn toward one game in particular, a game that stood alone at the very back of the game room.

Black Tiger.

Capcom, 1987.

A swirling vortex had opened in the center of the game's monitor, and it was sucking in bits of trash, paper cups, bowling shoes-everything that wasn't nailed down.

Including me.

As my avatar neared it, I reflexively reached out and grabbed the joystick of a Time Pilot machine.

My feet were instantly lifted off the floor as the vortex continued to pull my avatar inexorably toward it.

At this point, I was actually grinning in anticipation.

I was all prepared to pat myself on the back, because I'd mastered Black Tiger long ago, during the first year of the Hunt.

In the years prior to his death, when Halliday had been living in seclusion, the only thing he'd posted on his website was a brief looping animation.

It showed his avatar, Anorak, sitting in his castle's library, mixing potions and poring over dusty spellbooks.

This animation had run on a continuous loop for over a decade, until it was finally replaced by the Scoreboard on the morning Halliday died.

In that animation, hanging on the wall behind Anorak, you could see a large painting of a black dragon.

Gunters had filled countless message board threads arguing about the meaning of the painting, about what the black dragon signified or whether it signified anything at all.

But I'd been sure of its meaning from the start.

In one of the earliest journal entries in Anorak's Almanac, Halliday wrote that whenever his parents would start screaming at each other, he would sneak out of the house and ride his bike to the local bowling alley to play Black Tiger, because it was a game he could beat on just one quarter.

AA 23:234: "For one quarter, Black Tiger lets me escape from my rotten existence for three glorious hours.

Pretty good deal."

Black Tiger had first been released in Japan under its original title Burakku Doragon.

Black Dragon.

The game had been renamed for its American release.

I'd deduced that the black dragon painting on the wall of Anorak's study had been a subtle hint that Burakku Doragon would play a key role in the Hunt.

So I'd studied the game until, like Halliday, I could reach the end on just one credit.

After that, I continued to play it every few months, just to keep from getting rusty.

Now, it looked as if my foresight and diligence were about to pay off.

I was only able to hold on to the Time Pilot joystick for a few seconds.

Then I lost my grip and my avatar was sucked directly into the Black Tiger game's monitor.

Everything went black for a moment.

Then I found myself in surreal surroundings.

I was now standing inside a narrow dungeon corridor.

On my left was a high gray cobblestone wall with a mammoth dragon skull mounted on it.

The wall stretched up and up, vanishing into the shadows above.

I couldn't make out any ceiling.

The dungeon floor was composed of floating circular platforms arranged end to end in a long line that stretched out into the darkness ahead.

To my right, beyond the platforms' edge, there was nothing-just an endless, empty black void.

I turned around, but there was no exit behind me.

Just another high cobblestone wall, stretching up into the infinite blackness overhead.

I looked down at my avatar's body.

I now looked exactly like the hero of Black Tiger-a muscular, half-naked barbarian warrior dressed in an armored thong and a horned helmet.

My right arm disappeared in a strange metal gauntlet, from which hung a long retractable chain with a spiked metal ball on the end.

My right hand deftly held three throwing daggers.

When I hurled them off in the black void at my right, three more identical daggers instantly appeared in my hand.

When I tried jumping, I discovered that I could leap thirty feet straight up and land back on my feet with catlike grace.

Now I understood.

I was about to play Black Tiger, all right.

But not the fifty- year-old, 2-D, side-scrolling platform game that I had mastered.

I was now standing inside a new, immersive, three-dimensional version of the game that Halliday had created.

My knowledge of the original game's mechanics, levels, and enemies would definitely come in handy, but the game play was going to be completely different, and it would require an entirely different set of skills.

The First Gate had placed me inside one of Halliday's favorite movies, and now the Second Gate had put me inside one of his favorite videogames.

While I was pondering the implication of this pattern, a message began to flash on my display: GO!

I looked around.

An arrow etched into the stone wall on my left pointed the way forward.

I stretched my arms and legs, cracked my knuckles, and took a deep breath.

Then, readying my weapons, I ran forward, leaping from platform to platform, to confront the first of my adversaries.

Halliday had faithfully re-created every detail of Black Tiger's eight-level dungeon.

I got off to a rough start and lost a life before I even cleared the first boss.

But then I began to acclimate to playing the game in three dimensions (and from a first-person perspective).

Eventually, I found my groove.

I pressed onward, leaping from platform to platform, attacking in midair, dodging the relentless onslaught of blobs, skeletons, snakes, mummies, minotaurs, and yes, ninjas.

Each enemy I vanquished dropped a pile of "Zenny coins"

that I could later use to purchase armor, weapons, and potions from one of the bearded wise men scattered throughout each level.

(These "wise men"

apparently thought setting up a small shop in the middle of a monster-infested dungeon was a fine idea.) There were no time-outs, and no way for me to pause the game.

Once you entered a gate, you couldn't just stop and log out.

The system wouldn't allow it.

Even if you removed your visor, you would remain logged in.

The only way out of a gate was to go through it.

Or die.

I managed to clear all eight levels of the game in just under three hours.

The closest I came to death was during my battle with the final boss, the Black Dragon, who, of course, looked exactly like the beast depicted in the painting in Anorak's study.

I'd used up all of my extra lives, and my vitality bar was almost at zero, but I managed to keep moving and stay clear of the dragon's fiery breath while I slowly knocked down his life meter with a steady barrage of throwing daggers.

When I struck the final killing blow, the dragon crumbled into digital dust in front of me.

I let out a long, exhausted sigh of relief.

Then, with no transition whatsoever, I found myself back in the bowling alley game room, standing in front of the Black Tiger game.

In front of me, on the game's monitor, my armored barbarian was striking a heroic pose.

The following text appeared below him: YOU HAVE RETURNED PEACE AND PROSPERITY TO OUR NATION.

THANK YOU, BLACK TIGER!

CONGRATULATIONS ON YOUR STRENGTH AND WISDOM!

Then something strange happened-something that had never happened when I'd beaten the original game.

One of the "wise men"

from the dungeon appeared on the screen, with a speech balloon that said, "Thank you.

I am indebted to you.

Please accept a giant robot as your reward."

A long row of robot icons appeared below the wise man, stretching across the screen horizontally.

By moving the joystick left or right, I found that I was able to scroll through a selection of over a hundred different "giant robots."

When one of these robots was highlighted, a detailed list of its stats and weaponry appeared on the screen beside it.

There were several robots I didn't recognize, but most were familiar.

I spotted Gigantor, Tranzor Z, the Iron Giant, Jet Jaguar, the sphinx-headed Giant Robo from Johnny Sokko and His Flying Robot, the entire Shogun Warriors toy line, and many of the mechs featured in both the Macross and Gundam anime series.

Eleven of these icons were grayed out and had a red "X"

over them, and these robots could not be identified or selected.

I knew they must be the ones taken by Sorrento and the other Sixers who had cleared this gate before me.

It seemed possible that I was about to be awarded a real, working recreation of whichever robot I selected, so I studied my options carefully, searching for the one I thought would be the most powerful and well armed.

But I stopped cold when I saw Leopardon, the giant transforming robot used by Supaidaman, the incarnation of Spider-Man who appeared on Japanese TV in the late 1970s.

I'd discovered Supaidaman during the course of my research and had become somewhat obsessed with the show.

So I didn't care if Leopardon was the most powerful robot available.

I had to have him, regardless.

I highlighted that icon and tapped the Fire button.

A twelve-inch-tall replica of Leopardon appeared on top of the Black Tiger cabinet.

I grabbed it and placed it in my inventory.

There were no instructions, and the item description field was blank.

I made a mental note to examine it later, when I got back to my stronghold.

Meanwhile, on the Black Tiger monitor, the end credits had begun to scroll over an image of the game's barbarian hero sitting on a throne with a slender princess at his side.

I respectfully read each of the programmers' names.

They were all Japanese, except for the very last credit, which read OASIS PORT BY J.

D.

HALLIDAY.

When the credits ended, the monitor went dark for a moment.

Then a symbol slowly appeared in the center of the screen: a glowing red circle with a five- pointed star inside it.

The points of the star extended just beyond the outer edge of the circle.

A second later, an image of the Crystal Key appeared, spinning slowly in the center of the glowing red star.

I felt a rush of adrenaline, because I recognized the red star symbol, and I knew where it was meant to lead me.

I snapped several screenshots, just to be safe.

A moment later, the monitor went dark, and the Black Tiger game cabinet melted and morphed into a door- shaped portal with glowing jade edges.

The exit.

I let out a triumphant cheer and jumped through it.

When I emerged from the gate, my avatar reappeared back inside Tyrell's office.

The Voight-Kampff machine had reappeared in its original location, resting on the table beside me.

I checked the time.

Over three hours had passed since I'd first entered the gate.

The room was deserted, save for the owl, and the security klaxons were no longer wailing.

The NPC guards must have busted in and searched this area while I was still inside the gate, because they no longer appeared to be looking for me.

The coast was clear.

I made my way back to the elevator and up to the landing platform without incident.

And thanks be to Crom, the Vonnegut was still parked right where I'd left it, its cloaking device still engaged.

I ran on board and left Axrenox, jumping to light speed as soon as I reached orbit.

As the Vonnegut streaked through hyperspace, headed for the nearest stargate, I pulled up one of the screenshots I'd taken of the red star symbol.

Then I opened my grail diary and accessed the subfolder devoted to the legendary Canadian rock band Rush.

Rush had been Halliday's favorite band, from his teens onward.

He'd once revealed in an interview that he'd coded every single one of his videogames (including the OASIS) while listening exclusively to Rush albums.

He often referred to Rush's three members-Neil Peart, Alex Lifeson, and Geddy Lee- as "the Holy Trinity"

or "the Gods of the North."

In my grail diary, I had every single Rush song, album, bootleg, and music video ever made.

I had high-res scans of all their liner notes and album artwork.

Every frame of Rush concert footage in existence.

Every radio and television interview the band had ever done.

Unabridged biographies on each band member, along with copies of their side projects and solo work.

I pulled up the band's discography and selected the album I was looking for: 2112, Rush's classic sci-fithemed concept album.

A high-resolution scan of the album's cover appeared on my display.

The band's name and the album's title were printed over a field of stars, and below that, appearing as if reflected in the surface of a rippling lake, was the symbol I'd seen on the Black Tiger game's monitor: a red five-pointed star enclosed in a circle.

When I placed the album cover side by side with the screenshot of the game screen, the two symbols matched exactly.

2112's title track is an epic seven-part song, over twenty minutes in length.

The song tells the story of an anonymous rebel living in the year 2112, a time when creativity and self-expression have been outlawed.

The red star on the album's cover was the symbol of the Solar Federation, the oppressive interstellar society in the story.

The Solar Federation was controlled by a group of "priests,"

lyrics told me exactly where the Crystal Key was hidden: We are the Priests of the Temples of Syrinx Our great computers fill the hallowed halls.

We are the Priests of the Temples of Syrinx All the gifts of life are held within our walls.

There was a planet in Sector Twenty-one named Syrinx.

That was where I was headed now.

The OASIS atlas described Syrinx as "a desolate world with rocky terrain and no NPC inhabitants."

When I accessed the planet's colophon, I saw that Syrinx's author was listed as "Anonymous."

But I knew the planet must have been coded by Halliday, because its design matched the world described in 2112's liner notes.

2112 was originally released in 1976, back when most music was sold on twelve-inch vinyl records.

The records came in cardboard sleeves with artwork and a track listing printed on them.

Some album sleeves opened up like a book and included more artwork and liner notes inside, along with lyrics and information about the band.

As I pulled up a scan of 2112's original fold-out album sleeve, I saw that there was a second image of the red star symbol on the inside.

This one depicted a naked man cowering in front of the star, both his hands raised in fear.

On the opposite side of the record sleeve were the printed lyrics to all seven parts of the 2112 suite.

The lyrics for each section were preceded by a paragraph of prose that augmented the narrative laid out in the lyrics.

These brief vignettes were told from the point of view of 2112's anonymous protagonist.

I lie awake, staring out at the bleakness of Megadon.

City and sky become one, merging into a single plane, a vast sea of unbroken grey.

The Twin Moons, just two pale orbs as they trace their way across the steely sky.

When my ship reached Syrinx, I saw the twin moons, By-Tor and Snow Dog, that orbited the planet.

Their names were taken from another classic Rush song.

And down below, on the planet's bleak gray surface, there were exactly 1,024 copies of Megadon, the domed city described in the liner notes.

That was twice the number of Zork instances there'd been on Frobozz, so I knew the Sixers couldn't barricade them all.

With my cloaking device engaged, I selected the nearest instance of the city and landed the Vonnegut just outside the wall of its dome, watching my scopes for other ships.

Megadon was anchored atop a rocky plateau, on the edge of an immense cliff.

The city appeared to be in ruins.

Its massive transparent dome was riddled with cracks and looked as though it might collapse at any moment.

I was able to enter the city by squeezing through one of the largest of these cracks, at the base of the dome.

The city of Megadon reminded me of an old 1950s sci-fi paperback cover painting depicting the crumbling ruins of a once-great technologically advanced civilization.

In the absolute center of the city I found a towering obelisk-shaped temple with wind-blasted gray walls.

A giant red star of the Solar Federation was emblazoned above the entrance.

I was standing before the Temple of Syrinx.

It wasn't covered by a force field, or surrounded by a detachment of Sixers.

There wasn't a soul in sight.

I drew my guns and walked through the entrance of the temple.

Inside, mammoth obelisk-shaped supercomputers stood in long rows, filling the giant, cathedral-like temple.

I wandered along these rows, listening to the deep hum of the machines, until I finally reached the center of the temple.

There, I found a raised stone altar with the five-pointed red star etched into its surface.

As I stepped up to the altar, the humming of the computers ceased, and the chamber grew silent.

It appeared I was supposed to place something on the altar, an offering to the Temple of Syrinx.

But what kind of offering?

The twelve-inch Leopardon robot I'd acquired after completing the Second Gate didn't seem to fit.

I tried placing it on the altar anyway and nothing happened.

I placed the robot back in my inventory and stood there for a moment, thinking.

Then I remembered something else from the 2112 liner notes.

I pulled them up and scanned over them again.

There was my answer, in the text that Behind my beloved waterfall, in the little room that was hidden beneath the cave, I found it.

I brushed away the dust of the years, and picked it up, holding it reverently in my hands.

I had no idea what it might be, but it was beautiful.

I learned to lay my fingers across the wires, and to turn the keys to make them sound differently.

As I struck the wires with my other hand, I produced my first harmonious sounds, and soon my own music!

I found the waterfall near the southern edge of the city, just inside the curved wall of the atmospheric dome.

As soon as I found it, I activated my jet boots and flew over the foaming river below the falls, then passed through the waterfall itself.

My haptic suit did its best to simulate the sensation of torrents of falling water striking my body, but it felt more like someone pounding on my head, shoulders, and back with a bundle of sticks.

Once I'd passed through the falls to the other side, I found the opening of a cave and went inside.

The cave narrowed into a long tunnel, which terminated in a small, cavernous room.

I searched the room and discovered that one of the stalagmites protruding from the floor was slightly worn around the tip.

I grabbed the stalagmite and pulled it toward me, but it didn't budge.

I tried pushing, and it gave, bending as if on some hidden hinge, like a lever.

I heard a rumble of grinding stone behind me, and I turned to see a trapdoor opening in the floor.

A hole had also opened in the roof of the cave, casting a brilliant shaft of light down through the open trapdoor, into a tiny hidden chamber below.

I took an item out of my inventory, a wand that could detect hidden traps, magical or otherwise.

I used it to make sure the area was clear, then jumped down through the trapdoor and landed on the dusty floor of the hidden chamber.

It was a tiny cube-shaped room with a large rough-hewn stone standing against the north wall.

Embedded in the stone, neck first, was an electric guitar.

I recognized its design from the 2112 concert footage I'd watched during the trip here.

It was a 1974 Gibson Les Paul, the exact guitar used by Alex Lifeson during the 2112 tour.

I grinned at the absurd Arthurian image of the guitar in the stone.

Like every gunter, I'd seen John Boorman's film Excalibur many times, so it seemed obvious what I should do next.

I reached out with my right hand, grasped the neck of the guitar, and pulled.

The guitar came free of the stone with a prolonged metallic shhingggg!

As I held the guitar over my head, the metallic ringing segued into a guitar power chord that echoed throughout the cave.

I stared down at the guitar, about to activate my jet boots again, to fly back up through the trapdoor and out of the cave.

But then an idea occurred to me and I froze.

James Halliday had taken guitar lessons for a few years in high school.

That was what had first inspired me to learn to play.

I'd never held an actual guitar, but on a virtual axe, I could totally shred.

I searched my inventory and found a guitar pick.

Then I opened my grail diary and pulled up the sheet music for 2112, along with the guitar tablature for the song "Discovery,"

which describes the hero's discovery of the guitar in a room hidden behind a waterfall.

As I began to play the song, the sound of the guitar blasted off the chamber walls and back out through the cave, despite the absence of any electricity or amplifiers.

When I finished playing the first measure of "Discovery,"

a message briefly appeared, carved into the stone from which I'd pulled the guitar.

The first was ringed in red metal The second, in green stone The third is clearest crystal and cannot be unlocked alone In seconds, the words began to vanish, fading from the stone along with the strains of the last note I'd played on the guitar.

I quickly snapped a screenshot of the riddle, already trying to sort out its meaning.

It was about the Third Gate, of course.

And how it could not "be unlocked alone."

Had the Sixers played the song and discovered this message?

I seriously doubted it.

They would have pulled the guitar from the stone and immediately returned it to the temple.

If so, they probably didn't know there was some sort of trick to unlocking the Third Gate.

And that would explain why they still hadn't reached the egg.

I returned to the temple and placed the guitar on the altar.

As I did, the towering computers around me began to emit a cacophony of sound, like a grand orchestra tuning up.

The noise built to a deafening crescendo before ceasing abruptly.

Then there was a flash of light on the altar, and the guitar transformed into the Crystal Key.

When I reached out and picked up the key, a chime sounded, and my score on the Scoreboard increased by 25,000 points.

When added to the 200,000 I'd received for clearing the Second Gate, that brought my total score up to 353,000 points, one thousand points more than Sorrento.

I was back in first place.

But I knew this was no time to celebrate.

I quickly examined the Crystal Key, tilting it up to study its glittering, faceted surface.

I didn't see any words etched there, but I did find a small monogram etched in the center of the key's crystal handle, a single calligraphic letter "A"

that I recognized immediately.

That same letter "A"

appeared in the Character Symbol box on James Halliday's first Dungeons & Dragons character sheet.

The very same monogram also appeared on the dark robes of his famous OASIS avatar, Anorak.

And, I knew, that same emblematic letter adorned the front gates of Castle Anorak, his avatar's impregnable stronghold.

In the first few years of the Hunt, gunters had swarmed like hungry insects to any OASIS location that seemed like a possible hiding place for the three keys, specifically planets originally coded by Halliday himself.

Chief among these was the planet Chthonia, a painstaking re-creation of the fantasy world Halliday had created for his high-school Dungeons & Dragons campaign, and also the setting of many of his early videogames.

Chthonia had become the gunters' Mecca.

Like everyone else, I'd felt obligated to make a pilgrimage there, to visit Castle Anorak.

But the castle was impregnable and always had been.

No avatar but Anorak himself had ever been able to pass through its entrance.

But now I knew there must be a way to enter Castle Anorak.

Because the Third Gate was hidden somewhere inside.

When I got back to my ship, I blasted off and set a course for Chthonia in Sector Ten.

Then I began to scan the newsfeeds, intending to check out the media frenzy my return to first place was generating.

But my score wasn't the top story.

No, the big news that afternoon was that the hiding place of Halliday's Easter egg had, at long last, finally been revealed to the world.

It was, the news anchors said, located somewhere on the planet Chthonia, inside Castle Anorak.

They knew this because the entire Sixer army was now encamped around the castle.

They'd arrived earlier that day, shortly after I'd cleared the Second Gate.

I knew the timing couldn't be a coincidence.

My progress must have prompted the Sixers to end their covert attempts to clear the Third Gate and make its location public by barricading it before I or anyone else could reach it.

When I arrived at Chthonia a few minutes later, I did a cloaked flyby of the castle, just to gauge the lay of the land for myself.

It was even worse than I'd imagined.

The Sixers had installed some type of magical shield over Castle Anorak, a semitransparent dome that completely covered the castle and the area around it.

Encamped inside the shield wall was the entire Sixer army.

A vast collection of troops, tanks, weapons, and vehicles surrounded the castle on all sides.

Several gunter clans were already on the scene, and they were making their first attempts to bring down the shield by launching high-yield nukes at it.

Each detonation was followed by a brief atomic light show, and then the blast would dissipate harmlessly against the shield.

The attacks on the shield continued for the next few hours as the news spread and more and more gunters arrived on Chthonia.

The clans launched every type of weapon they could think of at the shield, but nothing affected it.

Not nukes, not fireballs, and not magic missiles.

Eventually, a team of gunters tried to dig a tunnel under the dome wall, and that was when it was discovered that the shield was actually a complete sphere surrounding the castle, above- and belowground.

Later that night, several high-level gunter wizards finished casting a series of divination spells on the castle and announced on the message boards that the shield around the castle was generated by a powerful artifact called the Orb of Osuvox, which could only be operated by a wizard who was ninety-ninth level.

According to the artifact's item description, it could create a spherical shield around itself, with a circumference of up to half a kilometer.

This shield was impenetrable and indestructible and could vaporize just about anything that touched it.

It could also be kept up indefinitely, as long as the wizard operating the orb remained immobile and kept both hands on the artifact.

In the days that followed, gunters tried everything they could think of to penetrate the shield.

Magic.

Technology.

Teleportation.

Counterspells.

Other artifacts.

Nothing worked.

There was no way to get inside.

An air of hopelessness quickly swept through the gunter community.

Solos and clansmen alike were ready to throw in the towel.

The Sixers had the Crystal Key and exclusive access to the Third Gate.

Everyone agreed that The End was near, that the Hunt was "all over but the crying."

During all of these developments, I somehow managed to keep my cool.

There was a chance the Sixers hadn't even figured out how to open the Third Gate yet.

Of course, they had plenty of time now.

They could be slow and methodical.

Sooner or later, they would stumble on the solution.

But I refused to give up.

Until an avatar reached Halliday's Easter egg, anything was still possible.

Like any classic videogame, the Hunt had simply reached a new, more difficult level.

A new level often required an entirely new strategy.

I began to formulate a plan.

A bold, outrageous plan that would require epic amounts of luck to pull off.

I set this plan in motion by e-mailing Art3mis, Aech, and Shoto.

My message told them exactly where to find the Second Gate and how to obtain the Crystal Key.

Once I was sure all three of them had received my message, I initiated the next phase of my plan.

This was the part that terrified me, because I knew there was a good chance it was going to end up getting me killed.

But at this point, I no longer cared.

I was going to reach the Third Gate, or die trying.

Going outside is highly overrated.

When the IOI corporate police came to arrest me, I was right in the middle of the movie Explorers (1985, directed by Joe Dante).

It's about three kids who build a spaceship in their backyard and then fly off to meet aliens.

Easily one of the greatest kid flicks ever made.

I'd gotten into the habit of watching it at least once a month.

It kept me centered.

I had a thumbnail of my apartment building's external security camera feed at the edge of my display, so I saw the IOI Indentured Servant Retrieval Transport pull up out front, siren wailing and lights flashing.

Then four jackbooted, riot- helmeted dropcops jumped out and ran into the building, followed by a guy in a suit.

I continued to watch them on the lobby camera as they waved their IOI badges, blew past the security station, and filed onto the elevator.

Now they were on their way up to my floor.

"Max,"

I muttered, noting the fear in my own voice.

"Execute security macro number one: Crom, strong in his mountain."

This voice command instructed my computer to execute a long series of preprogrammed actions, both online and in the real world.

"You g-g-got it, Chief!"

Max replied cheerfully, and a split second later, my apartment's security system switched into lockdown mode.

My reinforced plate- titanium WarDoor swung down from the ceiling, slamming and locking into place over my apartment's built-in security door.

On the security camera mounted in the hallway outside my apartment, I watched the four dropcops get off the elevator and sprint down the hallway to my door.

The two guys in front were carrying plasma welders.

The other two held industrial-strength VoltJolt stun guns.

The suit, who brought up the rear, was carrying a digital clipboard.

I wasn't surprised to see them.

I knew why they were here.

They were here to cut open my apartment and pull me out of it, like a chunk of Spam being removed from a can.

When they reached my door, my scanner gave them the once-over, and their ID data flashed on my display, informing me that all five of these men were IOI credit officers with a valid indenturement arrest warrant for one Bryce Lynch, the occupant of this apartment.

So, in keeping with local, state, and federal law, my apartment building's security system immediately opened both of my security doors to grant them entrance.

But the WarDoor that had just slammed into place kept them outside.

Of course, the dropcops expected me to have redundant security, which is why they'd brought plasma welders.

The IOI drone in the suit squeezed past the dropcops and gingerly pressed his thumb to my door intercom.

His name and corporate title appeared on my display: Michael Wilson, IOI Credit and Collections Division, Employee # IOI- 481231.

Wilson looked up into the lens of my hallway camera and smiled pleasantly.

"Mr.

Lynch,"

he said.

"My name is Michael Wilson, and I'm with the Credit and Collections division of Innovative Online Industries."

He consulted his clipboard.

"I'm here because you have failed to make the last three payments on your IOI Visa card, which has an outstanding balance in excess of twenty thousand dollars.

Our records also show that you are currently unemployed and have therefore been classified as impecunious.

Under current federal law, you are now eligible for mandatory indenturement.

You will remain indentured until you have paid your debt to our company in full, along with all applicable interest, processing and late fees, and any other charges or penalties that you incur henceforth."

Wilson motioned toward the dropcops.

"These gentlemen are here to assist me in apprehending you and escorting you to your new place of employment.

We request that you open your door and grant us access to your residence.

Please be aware that we are authorized to seize any personal belongings you have inside.

The sale value of these items will, of course, be deducted from your outstanding credit balance."

As far as I could tell, Wilson recited all of this without taking a single breath, speaking in the flat monotone of someone who repeats the same sentences all day long.

After a brief pause, I replied through the intercom.

"Sure thing, guys.

Just give me a minute to get my pants on.

Then I'll be right out."

Wilson frowned.

"Mr.

Lynch, if you do not grant us access to your residence within ten seconds, we are authorized to enter by force.

The cost of any damage resulting from our forced entry, including all property damage and repair labor, will be added to your outstanding balance.

Thank you."

Wilson stepped away from the intercom and nodded to the others.

One of the dropcops immediately powered up his welder, and when the tip began to glow molten orange, he began cutting through my War-Door's titanium plating.

The other welder moved a few feet farther down and began to cut a hole right through the wall of my apartment.

These guys had access to the building's security specs, so they knew the walls of each apartment were lined with steel plating and a layer of concrete, which they could cut through much more quickly than the titanium WarDoor.

Of course, I'd taken the precaution of reinforcing my apartment's walls, floor, and ceiling, with a titanium alloy SageCage, which I'd assembled piece by piece.

Once they cut through my wall, they would have to cut through the cage, too.

But this would buy me only five or six extra minutes, at the most.

Then they would be inside.

I'd heard that dropcops had a nickname for this procedure-cutting an indent out of a fortified residence so they could arrest him.

They called it doing a C- section.

I dry-swallowed two of the antianxiety pills I'd ordered in preparation for this day.

I'd already taken two earlier that morning, but they didn't seem to be working.

Inside the OASIS, I closed all the windows on my display and set my account's security level to maximum.

Then I pulled up the Scoreboard, just to check it one last time and reassure myself that nothing had changed and that the Sixers still hadn't won.

The top ten rankings had been static for several days now.

HIGH SCORES: 1.

Art3mis 354,000 2.

Parzival 353,000 3.

IOI-655321 352,000 4.

Aech 352,000 5.

IOI-643187 349,000 6.

IOI-621671 348,000 7.

IOI-678324 347,000 8.

Shoto 347,000 9.

IOI-637330 346,000 10.

IOI-699423 346,000 Art3mis, Aech, and Shoto had all cleared the Second Gate and obtained the Crystal Key within forty-eight hours of receiving my e-mail.

When Art3mis received the 25,000 points for reaching the Crystal Key, it had put her back in first place, due to the point bonuses she'd already received for finding the Jade Key first, and the Copper Key second.

Art3mis, Aech, and Shoto had all tried to contact me since receiving my e- mail, but I hadn't answered any of their phone calls, e-mails, or chat requests.

I saw no reason to tell them what I intended to do.

They couldn't do anything to help me and would probably just try to talk me out of it.

There was no turning back now, anyway.

I closed the Scoreboard and took a long look around my stronghold, wondering if it was for the last time.

Then I took several quick deep breaths, like a deep-sea diver preparing to submerge, and tapped the logout icon on my display.

The OASIS vanished, and my avatar reappeared inside my virtual office, a standalone simulation stored on my console's hard drive.

I opened a console window and keyed in the command word to activate my computer's self-destruct sequence: SHITSTORM.

A progress meter appeared on my display, showing that my hard drive was now being zeroed out and wiped clean.

"Good-bye, Max,"

I whispered.

"Adios, Wade,"

Max said, just a few seconds before he was deleted.

Sitting in my haptic chair, I could already feel the heat coming from the other side of the room.

When I pulled off my visor, I saw smoke pouring in through the holes being cut in the door and the wall.

It was starting to get too thick for my apartment's air purifiers to handle.

I began to cough.

The dropcop working on my door finished cutting his hole.

The smoking circle of metal fell to the floor with a heavy metallic boom that made me jump in my chair.

As the welder stepped back, another dropcop stepped forward and used a small canister to spray some sort of freezing foam around the edge of the hole, cooling off the metal so they wouldn't burn themselves when they crawled inside.

Which was what they were about to do.

"Clear!"

one of them shouted from out in the hallway.

"No visible weapons!"

One of the stun-gun wielding dropcops climbed through the hole first.

Suddenly, he was standing right in front of me, his weapon leveled at my face.

"Don't move!"

he shouted.

"Or you get the juice, understand?"

I nodded that yes, I understood.

It occurred to me then that this cop was the first visitor I'd ever had in my apartment in all the time I'd lived there.

The second dropcop to crawl inside wasn't nearly as polite.

Without a word, he walked over and jammed a ball gag in my mouth.

This was standard procedure, because they didn't want me to issue any more voice commands to my computer.

They needn't have bothered.

The moment the first dropcop had entered my apartment, an incendiary device had detonated inside my computer.

It was already melting to slag.

When the dropcop finished strapping on the ball gag, he grabbed me by the exoskeleton of my haptic suit, yanked me out of my haptic chair like a rag doll, and threw me on the floor.

The other dropcop hit the kill switch that opened my WarDoor, and the last two dropcops rushed in, followed by Wilson the suit.

I curled into a ball on the floor and closed my eyes.

I started to shake involuntarily.

I tried to prepare myself for what I knew was about to happen next.

They were going to take me outside.

"Mr.

Lynch,"

Wilson said, smiling.

"I hereby place you under corporate arrest."

He turned to the dropcops.

"Tell the repo team to come on up and clear this place out."

He glanced around the room and noticed the thin line of smoke now pouring out of my computer.

He looked at me and shook his head.

"That was stupid.

We could have sold that computer to help pay down your debt."

I couldn't reply around the ball gag, so I just shrugged and gave him the finger.

They tore off my haptic suit and left it for the repo team.

I was totally naked underneath.

They gave me a disposable slate-gray jumpsuit to put on, with matching plastic shoes.

The suit felt like sandpaper, and it began to make me itch as soon as I put it on.

They'd cuffed my hands, so it wasn't easy to scratch.

They dragged me out into the hall.

The harsh fluorescents sucked the color out of everything and made it look like an old black-and-white film.

As we rode the elevator down to the lobby, I hummed along with the Muzak as loudly as I could, to show them I wasn't afraid.

When one of the dropcops waved his stun gun at me, I stopped.

They put a hooded winter coat on me in the lobby.

They didn't want me catching pneumonia now that I was company property.

A human resource.

Then they led me outside, and sunlight hit my face for the first time in over half a year.

It was snowing, and everything was covered in a thin layer of gray ice and slush.

I didn't know what the temperature was, but I couldn't remember ever feeling so cold.

The wind cut right to my bones.

They herded me over to their transport truck.

Two new indents already sat in the back, strapped into plastic seats, both wearing visors.

People they'd arrested earlier that morning.

The dropcops were like garbage collectors, making their daily rounds.

The indent on my right was a tall, thin guy, probably a few years older than me.

He looked like he might be suffering from malnutrition.

The other indent was morbidly obese, and I couldn't be sure of the person's gender.

I decided to think of him as male.

His face was obscured by a mop of dirty blond hair, and something that looked like a gas mask covered his nose and mouth.

A thick black tube ran from the mask down to a nozzle on the floor.

I wasn't sure of its purpose until he lurched forward, drawing his restraints tight, and vomited into the mask.

I heard a vacuum activate, sucking the indent's regurgitated Oreos down the tube and into the floor.

I wondered if they stored it in an external tank or just dumped it on the street.

Probably a tank.

IOI would probably have his vomit analyzed and put the results in his file.

"You feel sick?"

one of the dropcops asked as he removed my ball gag.

"Tell me now and I'll put a mask on you."

"I feel great,"

I said, not very convincingly.

"OK.

But if I have to clean up your puke, I'll make sure you regret it."

They shoved me inside and strapped me down directly across from the skinny guy.

Two of the dropcops climbed into the back with us, stowing their plasma welders in a locker.

The other two slammed the rear doors and climbed into the cab up front.

As we pulled away from my apartment complex, I craned my neck to look through the transport's tinted rear windows, up at the building where I'd lived for the past year.

I was able to spot my window up on the forty-second floor, because of its spray-painted black glass.

The repo team was probably already up there by now.

All of my gear was being disassembled, inventoried, tagged, boxed, and prepared for auction.

Once they finished emptying out my apartment, custodial bots would scour and disinfect it.

A repair crew would patch the outer wall and replace the door.

IOI would be billed, and the cost of the repairs would be added to my outstanding debt to the company.

By midafternoon, the lucky gunter who was next on the apartment building's waiting list would get a message informing him that a unit had opened up, and by this evening, the new tenant would probably already be moved in.

By the time the sun went down, all evidence that I'd ever lived there would be totally erased.

As the transport swung out onto High Street, I heard the tires crunch the salt crystals covering the frozen asphalt.

One of the dropcops reached over and slapped a visor on my face.

I found myself sitting on a sandy white beach, watching the sunset while waves crashed in front of me.

This must be the simulation they used to keep indents calm during the ride downtown.

Using my cuffed hand, I pushed the visor up onto my forehead.

The dropcops didn't seem to care or pay me any notice at all.

So I craned my head again to stare out the window.

I hadn't been out here in the real world for a long time, and I wanted to see how it had changed.

A thick film of neglect still covered everything in sight.

The streets, the buildings, the people.

Even the snow seemed dirty.

It drifted down in gray flakes, like ash after a volcanic eruption.

The number of homeless people seemed to have increased drastically.

Tents and cardboard shelters lined the streets, and the public parks I saw seemed to have been converted into refugee camps.

As the transport rolled deeper into the city's skyscraper core, I saw people clustered on every street corner and in every vacant lot, huddled around burning barrels and portable fuel-cell heaters.

Others waited in line at the free solar charging stations, wearing bulky, outdated visors and haptic gloves.

Their hands made small, ghostly gestures as they interacted with the far more pleasant reality of the OASIS via one of GSS's free wireless access points.

Finally, we reached 101 IOI Plaza, in the heart of downtown.

I stared out the window in silent apprehension as the corporate headquarters of Innovative Online Industries Inc.

came into view: two rectangular skyscrapers flanking a circular one, forming the IOI corporate logo.

The IOI skyscrapers were the three tallest buildings in the city, mighty towers of steel and mirrored glass joined by dozens of connective walkways and elevator trams.

The top of each tower disappeared into the sodium-vapor-drenched cloud layer above.

The buildings looked identical to their headquarters in the OASIS on IOI-1, but here in the real world they seemed much more impressive.

The transport rolled into a parking garage at the base of the circular tower and descended a series of concrete ramps until we arrived in a large open area resembling a loading dock.

A sign over a row of wide bay doors read IOI INDENTURED EMPLOYEE INDUCTION CENTER.

The other indents and I were herded off the transport, where a squad of stun gunarmed security guards was waiting to take custody of us.

Our handcuffs were removed; then another guard began to swipe each of us with a handheld retina scanner.

I held my breath as he held the scanner up to my eyes.

A second later, the unit beeped and he read off the information on its display.

"Lynch, Bryce.

Age twenty-two.

Full citizenship.

No criminal record.

Credit Default Indenturement."

He nodded to himself and tapped a series of icons on his clipboard.

Then I was led into a warm, brightly lit room filled with hundreds of other new indents.

They were all shuffling through a maze of guide ropes, like weary overgrown children at some nightmarish amusement park.

There seemed to be an equal number of men and women, but it was hard to tell, because nearly everyone shared my pale complexion and total lack of body hair, and we all wore the same gray jumpsuits and gray plastic shoes.

We looked like extras from THX 1138.

The line fed into a series of security checkpoints.

At the first checkpoint, each indent was given a thorough scan with a brand-new Meta-detector to make sure they weren't hiding any electronic devices on or in their persons.

While I waited for my turn, I saw several people pulled out of line when the scanner found a subcutaneous minicomputer or a voice-controlled phone installed as a tooth replacement.

They were led into another room to have the devices removed.

A dude just ahead of me in line actually had a top-of-the-line miniature Sinatro OASIS console concealed inside a prosthetic testicle.

Talk about balls.

Once I'd cleared a few more checkpoints, I was ushered into the testing area, a giant room filled with hundreds of small, soundproofed cubicles.

I was seated in one of them and given a cheap visor and an even cheaper pair of haptic gloves.

The gear didn't give me access to the OASIS, but I still found it comforting to put it on.

I was then given a battery of increasingly difficult aptitude tests intended to measure my knowledge and abilities in every area that might conceivably be of use to my new employer.

These tests were, of course, cross-referenced with the fake educational background and work history that I'd given to my bogus Bryce Lynch identity.

I made sure to ace all of the tests on OASIS software, hardware, and networking, but I intentionally failed the tests designed to gauge my knowledge of James Halliday and the Easter egg.

I definitely didn't want to get placed in IOI's Oology Division.

There was a chance I might run into Sorrento there.

I didn't think he'd recognize me-we'd never actually met in person, and I now barely resembled my old school ID photo-but I didn't want to risk it.

I was already tempting fate more than anyone in their right mind ever would.

Hours later, when I finally finished the last exam, I was logged into a virtual chat room to meet with an indenturement counselor.

Her name was Nancy, and in a hypnotic monotone, she informed me that, due to my exemplary test scores and impressive employment record, I had been "awarded"

the position of OASIS Technical Support Representative II.

I would be paid $28,500 a year, minus the cost of my housing, meals, taxes, medical, dental, optical, and recreation services, all of which would be deducted automatically from my pay.

My remaining income (if there was any) would be applied to my outstanding debt to the company.

Once my debt was paid in full, I would be released from indenturement.

At that time, based on my job performance, it was possible I would be offered a permanent position with IOI.

This was a complete joke, of course.

Indents were never able to pay off their debt and earn their release.

Once they got finished slapping you with pay deductions, late fees, and interest penalties, you wound up owing them more each month, instead of less.

Once you made the mistake of getting yourself indentured, you would probably remain indentured for life.

A lot of people didn't seem to mind this, though.

They thought of it as job security.

It also meant they weren't going to starve or freeze to death in the street.

My "Indenturement Contract"

appeared in a window on my display.

It contained a long list of disclaimers and warnings about my rights (or lack thereof) as an indentured employee.

Nancy told me to read it, sign it, and proceed to Indent Processing.

Then she logged out of the chat room.

I scrolled to the bottom of the contract without bothering to read it.

It was over six hundred pages long.

I signed the name Bryce Lynch, then verified my signature with a retinal scan.

Even though I was using a fake name, I wondered if the contract might still be legally binding.

I wasn't sure, and I didn't really care.

I had a plan, and this was part of it.

They led me down another corridor, into the Indenturement Processing Area.

I was placed on a conveyor belt that carried me through a long series of stations.

First, they took my jumpsuit and shoes and incinerated them.

Then they ran me through a kind of human car wash-a series of machines that soaped, scrubbed, disinfected, rinsed, dried, and deloused me.

Afterward, I was given a new gray jumpsuit and another pair of plastic slippers.

At the next station, a bank of machines gave me a complete physical, including a battery of blood tests.

(Luckily, the Genetic Privacy Act made it illegal for IOI to sample my DNA.) Then I was given a series of inoculations with an array of automated needle guns that shot me in both shoulders and both ass cheeks simultaneously.

As I inched forward along the conveyor, flat-screen monitors mounted overhead showed the same ten-minute training film over and over, on an endless loop: "Indentured Servitude: Your Fast Track from Debt to Success!"

The cast was made up of D-list television stars who cheerfully spouted corporate propaganda while relating the minutiae of IOI's indenturement policy.

After five viewings, I had every line of the damn thing memorized.

By the tenth viewing, I was mouthing the words along with the actors.

"What can I expect after I complete my initial processing and get placed in my permanent position?"

asked Johnny, the training film's main character.

You can expect to spend the rest of your life as a corporate slave, Johnny, I thought.

But I kept watching as, once again, the helpful IOI Human Resources rep pleasantly told Johnny all about the day-to-day life of an indent.

Finally, I reached the last station, where a machine fitted me with a security anklet-a padded metal band that locked around my ankle, just above the joint.

According to the training film, this device monitored my physical location and also granted or denied me access to different areas of the IOI office complex.

If I tried to escape, remove the anklet, or cause trouble of any kind, the device was capable of delivering a paralyzing electrical shock.

If necessary, it could also administer a heavy-duty tranquilizer directly into my bloodstream.

After the anklet was on, another machine clamped a small electronic device onto my right earlobe, piercing it in two locations.

I winced in pain and shouted a stream of profanity.

I knew from the training film that I'd just been fitted with an OCT.

OCT stood for "observation and communication tag."

But most indents just referred to it as "eargear."

It reminded me of the tags environmentalists used to put on endangered animals, to track their movements in the wild.

The eargear contained a tiny comlink that allowed the main IOI Human Resources computer to make announcements and issue commands directly into my ear.

It also contained a tiny forward-looking camera that let IOI supervisors see whatever was directly in front of me.

Surveillance cameras were mounted in every room in the IOI complex, but that apparently wasn't enough.

They also had to mount a camera to the side of every indent's head.

A few seconds after my eargear was attached and activated, I began to hear the placid monotone of the HR mainframe, droning instructions and other information.

The voice drove me nuts at first, but I gradually got used to it.

I didn't have much choice.

As I stepped off the conveyor, the HR computer directed me to a nearby cafeteria that looked like something out of an old prison movie.

I was given a lime green tray of food.

A tasteless soyburger, a lump of runny mashed potatoes, and some unrecognizable form of cobbler for dessert.

I devoured all of it in a few minutes.

The HR computer complimented me on my healthy appetite.

Then it informed me that I was now permitted to make a five-minute visit to the bathroom.

When I came out, I was directed onto an elevator with no buttons or floor indicator.

When the doors slid open, I saw the following stenciled on the wall: INDENT HAB-BLOCK 05-TECHSUP REPS.

I shuffled off the elevator and down the carpeted hallway.

It was quiet and dark.

The only illumination came from small path lighting embedded in the floor.

I'd lost track of the time.

It seemed like days had passed since I'd been pulled out of my apartment.

I was dead on my feet.

"Your first technical support shift begins in seven hours,"

the HR computer droned softly in my ear.

"You have until then to sleep.

Turn left at the intersection in front of you and proceed to your assigned hab-unit, number 42G."

I continued to do as I was told.

I thought I was already getting pretty good at it.

The Hab Block reminded me of a mausoleum.

It was a network of vaulted hallways, each lined with coffin-shaped sleeping capsules, row after row of them, stacked to the ceiling, ten high.

Each column of hab-units was numbered, and the door of each capsule was lettered, A through J, with unit A at the bottom.

I eventually reached my unit, near the top of column number forty-two.

As I approached it, the hatch irised open with a hiss, and a soft blue light winked on inside.

I ascended the narrow access ladder mounted between the adjacent rows of capsules, then stepped onto the short platform beneath the hatch to my unit.

When I climbed inside the capsule, the platform retracted and the hatch irised shut at my feet.

The inside of my hab-unit was an eggshell white injection-molded plastic coffin, a meter high, a meter wide, and two meters long.

The floor of the capsule was covered with a gel-foam mattress pad and pillow.

They both smelled like burned rubber, so I assumed they must be new.

In addition to the camera attached to the side of my head, there was a camera mounted above the door of my hab-unit.

The company didn't bother hiding it.

They wanted their indents to know they were being watched.

The unit's only amenity was the entertainment console-a large, flat touchscreen built into the wall.

A wireless visor was snapped into a holder beside it.

I tapped the touchscreen, activating the unit.

My new employee number and position appeared at the top of the display: Lynch, Bryce T.-OASIS TECH REP II-IOI Employee #338645.

A menu appeared below, listing the entertainment programming to which I presently had access.

It took only a few seconds to peruse my limited options.

I could view only one channel: IOI-N-the company's twenty-four-hour news network.

It provided a nonstop stream of company-related news and propaganda.

I also had access to a library of training films and simulations, most of which were geared toward my new position as an OASIS technical support representative.

When I tried to access one of the other entertainment libraries, Vintage Movies, the system informed me that I wouldn't be granted access to a wider selection of entertainment options until I had received an above-average rating in three consecutive employee performance reviews.

Then the system asked me if I wanted more information on the Indentured Employee Entertainment Reward Program.

I didn't.

The only TV show I had access to was a company-produced sitcom called Tommy Queue.

The synopsis said it was a "wacky situation comedy chronicling the misadventures of Tommy, a newly indentured OASIS tech rep struggling to achieve his goals of financial independence and on-the-job excellence!"

I selected the first episode of Tommy Queue, then unsnapped the visor and put it on.

As I expected, the show was really just a training film with a laugh track.

I had absolutely no interest in it.

I just wanted to go to sleep.

But I knew I was being watched, and that every move I made was being scrutinized and logged.

So I stayed awake as long as I could, ignoring one episode of Tommy Queue after another.

Despite my best efforts, my thoughts drifted to Art3mis.

Regardless of what I'd been telling myself, I knew she was the real reason I'd gone through with this lunatic plan.

What the hell was wrong with me?

There was a good chance I might never escape from this place.

I felt buried under an avalanche of self- doubt.

Had my dual obsessions with the egg and Art3mis finally driven me completely insane?

Why would I take such an idiotic risk to win over someone I'd never actually met?

Someone who appeared to have no interest in ever talking to me again?

Where was she right now?

Did she miss me?

I continued to mentally torture myself like that until I finally drifted off to sleep.

lOI's Technical Support call center occupied three entire floors of the headquarters' eastern I-shaped tower.

Each of these floors contained a maze of numbered cubicles.

Mine was stuck back in a remote corner, far from any windows.

My cubicle was completely empty except for an adjustable office chair bolted to the floor.

Several of the cubicles around me were unoccupied, awaiting the arrival of other new indents.

I wasn't permitted to have any decorations in my cubicle, because I hadn't earned that privilege yet.

If I obtained a sufficient number of "perk points"

by getting high productivity and customer approval ratings, I could "spend"

some of them to purchase the privilege of decorating my cube, perhaps with a potted plant or an inspirational poster of a kitten hanging from a clothesline.

When I arrived in my cubicle, I grabbed my company-issued visor and gloves from the rack on the bare cube wall and put them on.

Then I collapsed into my chair.

My work computer was built into the chair's circular base, and it activated itself automatically when I sat down.

My employee ID was verified and I was automatically logged into my work account on the IOI intranet.

I wasn't allowed to have any outbound access to the OASIS.

All I could really do was read work- related e-mails, view support documentation and procedural manuals, and check my call time statistics.

That was it.

And every move I made on the intranet was closely monitored, controlled, and logged.

I put myself in the call queue and began my twelve-hour shift.

I'd been an indent for only eight days now, but it already felt like I'd been imprisoned here for years.

The first caller's avatar appeared in front of me in my support chat room.

His name and stats also appeared, floating in the air above him.

He had the astoundingly clever name of "HotCock007."

I could see that it was going to be another fabulous day.

HotCock007 was a hulking bald barbarian with studded black leather armor and lots of demon tattoos covering his arms and face.

He was holding a gigantic bastard sword nearly twice as long as his avatar's body.

"Good morning, Mr.

HotCock007,"

I droned.

"Thank you for calling technical support.

I'm tech rep number 338645.

How may I help you this evening?"

The customer courtesy software filtered my voice, altering its tone and inflection to ensure that I always sounded cheerful and upbeat.

"Uh, yeah ..."

HotCock007 began.

"I just bought this bad-ass sword, and now I can't even use it!

I can't even attack nothing with it.

What the hell is wrong with this piece of shit?

Is it broke?"

"Sir, the only problem is that you're a complete fucking moron,"

I said.

I heard a familiar warning buzzer and a message flashed on my display: COURTESY VIOLATION-FLAGS: FUCKING, MORON LAST RESPONSE MUTED-VIOLATION LOGGED IOI's patented customer courtesy software had detected the inappropriate nature of my response and muted it, so the customer didn't hear what I'd said.

The software also logged my "courtesy violation"

and forwarded it to Trevor, my section supervisor, so that he could bring it up during my next biweekly performance review.

"Sir, did you purchase this sword in an online auction?"

"Yeah,"

HotCock007 replied.

"Paid out the ass for it too."

"Just a moment, sir, while I examine the item."

I already knew what his problem was, but I needed to make sure before telling him or I'd get hit with a fine.

I tapped the sword with my index finger, selecting it.

A small window opened and displayed the item's properties.

The answer was right there, on the first line.

This particular magic sword could only be used by an avatar who was tenth level or higher.

Mr.

HotCock007 was only seventh level.

I quickly explained this to him.

"What?!

That ain't fair!

The guy who sold it to me didn't say nothing about that!"

"Sir, it's always advisable to make sure your avatar can actually use an item before you purchase it."

"Goddammit!"

he shouted.

"Well, what am I supposed to do with it now?"

"You could shove it up your ass and pretend you're a corn dog."

COURTESY VIOLATION-RESPONSE MUTED-VIOLATION LOGGED.

I tried again.

"Sir, you might want to keep the item stored in your inventory until your avatar has attained tenth level.

Or you may wish to put the item back up for auction yourself and use the proceeds to purchase a similar weapon.

One with a power level commensurate to that of your avatar."

"Huh?"

HotCock007 responded.

"Whaddya mean?"

"Save it or sell it."

"Oh."

"Can I help you with anything else today, sir?"

"No, I don't guess-"

"Great.

Thank you for calling technical support.

Have an outstanding day."

I tapped the disconnect icon on my display, and HotCock007 vanished.

Call Time: 2:07.

As the next customer's avatar appeared-a red-skinned, large- breasted alien female named Vartaxxx-the customer satisfaction rating that HotCock007 had just given me appeared on my display.

It was a 6, out of a possible score of 10.

The system then helpfully reminded me that I needed to keep my average above 8.5 if I wanted to get a raise after my next review.

Doing tech support here was nothing like working from home.

Here, I couldn't watch movies, play games, or listen to music while I answered the endless stream of inane calls.

The only distraction was staring at the clock.

(Or the IOI stock ticker, which was always at the top of every indent's display.

You couldn't get rid of it.) During each shift, I was given three five-minute restroom breaks.

Lunch was thirty minutes.

I usually ate in my cubicle instead of the cafeteria, so I wouldn't have to listen to the other tech reps bitch about their calls or boast about how many perk points they'd earned.

I'd grown to despise the other indents almost as much as the customers.

I fell asleep five separate times during my shift.

Each time, when the system saw that I'd drifted off, it sounded a warning klaxon in my ears, jolting me back awake.

Then it noted the infraction in my employee data file.

My narcolepsy had become such a consistent problem during my first week that I was now being issued two little red pills each day to help me stay awake.

I took them too.

But not until after I got off work.

When my shift finally ended, I ripped off my headset and visor and walked back to my hab-unit as quickly as I could.

This was the only time each day I ever hurried anywhere.

When I reached my tiny plastic coffin, I crawled inside and collapsed on the mattress, facedown, in the same exact position as the night before.

And the night before that.

I lay there for a few minutes, staring at the time readout on my entertainment console out of the corner of my eye.

When it reached 7:07 p.m., I rolled over and sat up.

"Lights,"

I said softly.

This had become my favorite word over the past week.

In my mind, it had become synonymous with freedom.

The lights embedded in the shell of my hab-unit shut off, plunging the tiny compartment into darkness.

If someone had been watching either of my live security vidfeeds, they would have seen a brief flash as the cameras switched to night-vision mode.

Then I would have been clearly visible on their monitors once again.

But, thanks to some sabotage I'd performed earlier in the week, the security cameras in my hab-unit and my eargear were now no longer performing their assigned tasks.

So for the first time that day, I wasn't being watched.

That meant it was time to rock.

I tapped the entertainment center console's touchscreen.

It lit up, presenting me with the same choices I'd had on my first night here: a handful of training films and simulations, including the complete run of Tommy Queue episodes.

If anyone checked the usage logs for my entertainment center, they would show that I watched Tommy Queue every night until I fell asleep, and that once I'd worked my way through all sixteen episodes, I'd started over at the beginning.

The logs would also show that I fell asleep at roughly the same time every night (but not at exactly the same time), and that I slept like the dead until the following morning, when my alarm sounded.

Of course, I hadn't really been watching their inane corporate shitcom every night.

And I wasn't sleeping, either.

I'd actually been operating on about two hours of sleep a night for the past week, and it was beginning to take its toll on me.

But the moment the lights in my hab-unit went out, I felt energized and wide awake.

My exhaustion seemed to vanish as I began to navigate through the entertainment center operation menus from memory, the fingers of my right hand dancing rapidly across the touchscreen.

About seven months earlier, I'd obtained a set of IOI intranet passwords from the L33t Hax0rz Warezhaus, the same black-market data auction site where I'd purchased the information needed to create a new identity.

I kept an eye on all of the black-market data sites, because you never knew what might be up for sale on them.

OASIS server exploits.

ATM hacks.

Celebrity sex tapes.

You name it.

I'd been browsing through the L33t Hax0rz Warezhaus auction listings when one in particular caught my eye: IOI Intranet Access Passwords, Back Doors, and System Exploits.

The seller claimed to be offering classified proprietary information on IOI's intranet architecture, along with a series of administrative access codes and system exploits that could "give a user carte blanche inside the company network."

I would have assumed the data was bogus had it not been listed on such a respected site.

The anonymous seller claimed to be a former IOI contract programmer and one of the lead architects of its company intranet.

He was probably a turncoat-a programmer who intentionally coded back doors and security holes into a system he designed, so that he could later sell them on the black market.

It allowed him to get paid for the same job twice, and to salve any guilt he felt about working for a demonic multinational corporation like IOI.

The obvious problem, which the seller didn't bother to point out in the auction listing, was that these codes were useless unless you already had access to the company intranet.

IOI's intranet was a high-security, standalone network with no direct connections to the OASIS.

The only way to get access to IOI's intranet was to become one of their legitimate employees (very difficult and time- consuming).

Or you could join the company's ever-growing ranks of indentured servants.

I'd decided to bid on the IOI access codes anyway, on the off chance they might come in handy someday.

Since there was no way to verify the data's authenticity, the bidding stayed low, and I won the auction for a few thousand credits.

The codes arrived in my inbox a few minutes after the auction ended.

Once I'd finished decrypting the data, I examined it all thoroughly.

Everything looked legit, so I filed the info away for a rainy day and forgot about it-until about six months later, when I saw the Sixer barricade around Castle Anorak.

The first thing I thought of was the IOI access codes.

Then the wheels in my head began to turn and my ridiculous plan began to take shape.

I would alter the financial records on my bogus Bryce Lynch identity and allow myself to become indentured by IOI.

Once I infiltrated the building and got behind the company firewall, I would use the intranet passwords to hack into the Sixers' private database, then figure a way to bring down the shield they'd erected over Anorak's castle.

I didn't think anyone would anticipate this move, because it was so clearly insane.

I didn't test the IOI passwords until the second night of my indenturement.

I was understandably anxious, because if it turned out I'd been sold bogus data and none of the passwords worked, I would have sold myself into lifelong slavery.

Keeping my eargear camera pointed straight ahead, away from the screen, I pulled up the entertainment console's viewer settings menu, which allowed me to make adjustments to the display's audio and video output: volume and balance, brightness and tint.

I cranked each option up to its highest setting, then tapped the Apply button at the bottom of the screen three times.

I set the volume and brightness controls to their lowest settings and tapped the Apply button again.

A small window appeared in the center of the screen, prompting me for a maintenance-tech ID number and access password.

I quickly entered the ID number and the long alphanumeric password that I'd memorized.

I checked both for errors out of the corner of my eye, then tapped OK.

The system paused for what seemed like a very long time.

Then, to my great relief, the following message appeared: MAINTENANCE CONTROL PANEL-ACCESS GRANTED I now had access to a maintenance service account designed to allow repairmen to test and debug the entertainment unit's various components.

I was now logged in as a technician, but my access to the intranet was still pretty limited.

Still, it gave me all the elbow room I needed.

Using an exploit left by one of the programmers, I was now able to create a bogus admin account.

Once that was set up, I had access to just about everything.

My first order of business was to get some privacy.

I quickly navigated through several dozen submenus until I reached the control panel for the Indent Monitoring System.

When I entered my employee number my indent profile appeared on the display, along with a mug shot they'd taken of me during my initial processing.

The profile listed my indent account balance, pay grade, blood type, current performance review rating-every scrap of data the company had on me.

At the top right of my profile were two vidfeed windows, one fed by the camera in my eargear, the other linked to the camera in my hab-unit.

My eargear vidfeed was currently aimed at a section of the wall.

The hab-unit camera window showed a view of the back of my head, which I'd positioned to block the entertainment center's display screen.

I selected both vidfeed cameras and accessed their configuration settings.

Using one of the turncoat's exploits, I performed a quick hack that caused my eargear and hab-unit cameras to display the archived video from my first night of indenturement instead of a live feed.

Now, if someone checked my camera feeds, they'd see me lying asleep in my hab-unit, not sitting up all night, furiously hacking my way through the company intranet.

Then I programmed the cameras to switch to the prerecorded feeds whenever I shut out the lights in my hab-unit.

The split-second jump cut in the feed would be masked by the momentary video distortion that occurred when the cameras switched into night-vision mode.

I kept expecting to be discovered and locked out of the system, but it never happened.

My passwords continued to work.

I'd spent the past six nights laying siege to the IOI intranet, digging deeper and deeper into the network.

I felt like a convict in an old prison movie, returning to my cell each night to tunnel through the wall with a teaspoon.

Then, last night, just before I'd succumbed to exhaustion, I'd finally managed to navigate my way through the intranet's labyrinth of firewalls and into the main Oology Division database.

The mother lode.

The Sixers' private file pile.

And tonight, I would finally be able to explore it.

I knew that I needed to be able to take some of the Sixers' data with me when I escaped, so earlier in the week, I'd used my intranet admin account to submit a bogus hardware requisition form.

I had a ten-zettabyte flash drive delivered to a nonexistent employee ("Sam Lowery") in an empty cubicle a few rows away from my own.

Making sure to keep my eargear camera pointed in the other direction, I'd ducked into the cube, grabbed the tiny drive, pocketed it, and smuggled it back to my hab-unit.

That night, after I shut off the lights and disabled the security cameras, I unlocked my entertainment unit's maintenance access panel and installed the flash drive into an expansion slot used for firmware upgrades.

Now I could download data from the intranet directly to that drive.

I put on the entertainment center's visor and gloves, then stretched out on my mattress.

The visor presented me with a three-dimensional view of the Sixers' database, with dozens of overlapping data windows suspended in front of me.

Using my gloves, I began to manipulate these windows, navigating my way through the database's file structure.

The largest section of the database appeared to be devoted to information on Halliday.

The amount of data they had on him was staggering.

It made my grail diary look like a set of CliffsNotes.

They had things I'd never seen.

Things I didn't even know existed.

Halliday's grade-school report cards, home movies from his childhood, e-mails he'd written to fans.

I didn't have time to read over it all, but I copied the really interesting stuff over to my flash drive, to (hopefully) study later.

I focused on isolating the data related to Castle Anorak and the forces the Sixers had positioned in and around it.

I copied all of the intel on their weapons, vehicles, gunships, and troop numbers.

I also snagged all of the data I could find on the Orb of Osuvox, the artifact they were using to generate the shield around the castle, including exactly where they were keeping it and the employee number of the Sixer wizard they had operating it.

Then I hit the jackpot-a folder containing hundreds of hours of OASIS simcap recordings documenting the Sixers' initial discovery of the Third Gate and their subsequent attempts to open it.

As everyone now suspected, the Third Gate was located inside Castle Anorak.

Only avatars who possessed a copy of the Crystal Key could cross the threshold of the castle's front entrance.

To my disgust, I learned that Sorrento had been the first avatar to set foot inside Castle Anorak since Halliday's death.

The castle entrance led into a massive foyer whose walls, floor, and ceiling were all made of gold.

At the north end of the chamber, a large crystal door was set into the wall.

It had a small keyhole at its very center.

The moment I saw it, I knew I was looking at the Third Gate.

I fast-forwarded through several other recent simcap files.

From what I could tell, the Sixers still hadn't figured out how to open the gate.

Simply inserting the Crystal Key into the keyhole had no effect.

They'd had their entire team trying to figure out why for several days now, but still hadn't made any progress.

While the data and video on the Third Gate was copying over to my flash drive, I continued to delve deeper into the Sixer database.

Eventually, I uncovered a restricted area called the Star Chamber.

It was the only area of the database I couldn't seem to access.

So I used my admin ID to create a new "test account,"

then gave that account superuser access and full administrator privileges.

It worked and I was granted access.

The information inside the restricted area was divided into two folders: Mission Status and Threat Assessments.

I opened the Threat Assessments folder first, and when I saw what was inside, I felt the blood drain from my face.

There were five file folders, labeled Parzival, Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and Daito.

Daito's folder had a large red "X"

over it.

I opened the Parzival folder first.

A detailed dossier appeared, containing all of the information the Sixers had collected on me over the past few years.

My birth certificate.

My school transcripts.

At the bottom there was a link to a simcap of my entire chatlink session with Sorrento, ending with the bomb detonating in my aunt's trailer.

After I'd gone into hiding, they'd lost track of me.

They had collected thousands of screenshots and vidcaps of my avatar over the past year, and loads of data on my stronghold on Falco, but they didn't know anything about my location in the real world.

My current whereabouts were listed as "unknown."

I closed the window, took a deep breath, and opened the file on Art3mis.

At the very top was a school photo of a young girl with a distinctly sad smile.

To my surprise, she looked almost identical to her avatar.

The same dark hair, the same hazel eyes, and the same beautiful face I knew so well-with one small difference.

Most of the left half of her face was covered with a reddish-purple birthmark.

I would later learn that these types of birthmark were sometimes referred to as "port wine stains."

In the photo, she wore a sweep of her dark hair down over her left eye to try to conceal the mark as much as possible.

Art3mis had led me to believe that in reality she was somehow hideous, but now I saw that nothing could have been further from the truth.

To my eyes, the birthmark did absolutely nothing to diminish her beauty.

If anything, the face I saw in the photo seemed even more beautiful to me than that of her avatar, because I knew this one was real.

The data below the photo said that her real name was Samantha Evelyn Cook, that she was a twenty-year-old Canadian citizen, five feet and seven inches tall, and that she weighed one hundred and sixty-eight pounds.

The file also contained her home address-2206 Greenleaf Lane, Vancouver, British Columbia-along with a lot of other information, including her blood type and her school transcripts going all the way back to kindergarten.

I found an unlabeled video link at the bottom of her dossier, and when I selected it, a live vidfeed of a small suburban house appeared on my display.

After a few seconds, I realized I was looking at the house where Art3mis lived.

As I dug further into her file, I learned that they'd had her under surveillance for the past five months.

They had her house bugged too, because I found hundreds of hours of audio recordings made while she was logged into the OASIS.

They had complete text transcripts of every audible word she'd spoken while clearing the first two gates.

I opened Shoto's file next.

They knew his real name, Akihide Karatsu, and they also appeared to have his home address, an apartment building in Osaka, Japan.

His file also contained a school photo, showing a thin, stoic boy with a shaved head.

Like Daito, he looked nothing like his avatar.

Aech seemed to be the one they knew the least about.

His file contained very little information, and no photo-just a screenshot of his avatar.

His real name was listed as "Henry Swanson,"

but that was an alias used by Jack Burton in Big Trouble in Little China, so I knew it must be a fake.

His address was listed as "mobile,"

and below it there was a link labeled "Recent Access Points."

This turned out to be a list of the wireless node locations Aech had recently used to access his OASIS account.

They were all over the place: Boston; Washington, D.C.; New York City; Philadelphia; and most recently, Pittsburgh.

Now I began to understand how the Sixers had been able to locate Art3mis and Shoto.

IOI owned hundreds of regional telecom companies, effectively making them the largest Internet service provider in the world.

It was pretty difficult to get online without using a network they owned and operated.

From the looks of it, IOI had been illegally eavesdropping on most of the world's Internet traffic in an attempt to locate and identify the handful of gunters they considered to be a threat.

The only reason they hadn't been able to locate me was because I'd taken the paranoia-induced precaution of leasing a direct fiber-optic connection to the OASIS from my apartment complex.

I closed Aech's file, then opened the folder labeled Daito, already dreading what I might find there.

Like the others, they had his real name, Toshiro Yoshiaki, and his home address.

Two news articles about his "suicide"

were linked at the bottom of his dossier, along with an unlabeled video clip, time- stamped on the day he'd died.

I clicked on it.

It was handheld video camera footage showing three large men in black ski masks (one of whom was operating the camera) waiting silently in a hallway.

They appeared to receive an order via their radio earpieces, then used a key card to open the door of a tiny one-room apartment.

Daito's apartment.

I watched in horror as they rushed in, yanked him out of his haptic chair, and threw him off the balcony.

The bastards even filmed him plummeting to his death.

Probably at Sorrento's request.

A wave of nausea washed over me.

When it finally passed, I copied the contents of all five dossiers over to my flash drive, then opened the Mission Status folder.

It appeared to contain an archive of the Oology Division's status reports, intended for the Sixers' top brass.

The reports were arranged by date, with the most recent one listed first.

When I opened it, I saw that it was a directive memo sent from Nolan Sorrento to the IOI Board of Executives.

In it, Sorrento proposed sending agents to abduct Art3mis and Shoto from their homes to force them to help IOI open the Third Gate.

Once the Sixers had obtained the egg and won the contest, Art3mis and Shoto would "be disposed of."

I sat there in stunned silence.

Then I read the memo again, feeling a combination of rage and panic.

According to the time stamp, Sorrento had sent the memo just after eight o'clock, less than five hours ago.

So his superiors probably hadn't even seen it yet.

When they did, they would still want to meet to discuss Sorrento's suggested course of action.

So they probably wouldn't send their agents after Art3mis and Shoto until sometime tomorrow.

I still had time to warn them.

But to do that, I would have to drastically alter my escape plan.

Before my arrest, I'd set up a timed funds transfer that would deposit enough money in my IOI credit account to pay off my entire debt, forcing IOI to release me from indenturement.

But that transfer wouldn't happen for another five days.

By then, the Sixers would probably have Art3mis and Shoto locked in a windowless room somewhere.

I couldn't spend the rest of the week exploring the Sixer database, like I'd planned.

I had to grab as much data as I could and make my escape now.

I gave myself until dawn.

I worked frantically for the next four hours.

Most of that time was spent copying as much data as possible from the Sixer database to my stolen flash drive.

Once that task was completed, I submitted an Executive Oologist Supply Requisition Order.

This was an online form that Sixer commanders used to request weapons or equipment inside the OASIS.

I selected a very specific item, then scheduled its delivery for noon two days from now.

When I finally finished, it was six thirty in the morning.

The next tech-support shift change was now only ninety minutes away, and my hab-unit neighbors would start waking up soon.

I was out of time.

I pulled up my indenturement profile, accessed my debt statement, and zeroed out my outstanding balance-money I'd never actually borrowed to begin with.

Then I selected the Indentured Servant Observation and Communications Tag control settings submenu, which operated both my eargear and security anklet.

Finally, I did something I'd been dying to do for the past week-I disabled the locking mechanisms on both devices.

I felt a sharp pain as the eargear clamps retracted and pulled free of the cartilage on my left ear.

The device bounced off my shoulder and landed in my lap.

In the same instant, the shackle on my right ankle clicked open and fell off, revealing a band of abraded red skin.

I'd now passed the point of no return.

IOI security techs weren't the only ones who had access to my eargear's vidfeed.

The Indentured Servant Protection Agency also used it to monitor and record my daily activities, to ensure that my human rights were being observed.

Now that I'd removed the device, there would be no digital record of what happened to me from this moment forward.

If IOI security caught me before I made it out of the building, carrying a stolen flash drive filled with highly incriminating company data, I was dead.

The Sixers could torture and kill me, and no one would ever know.

I performed a few final tasks related to my escape plan, then logged out of the IOI intranet for the last time.

I pulled off my visor and gloves and opened the maintenance access panel next to the entertainment center console.

There was a small empty space below the entertainment module, between the prefab wall of my hab-unit and the one adjacent to it.

I removed the thin, neatly folded bundle I'd hidden there.

It was a vacuum-sealed IOI maintenance-tech uniform, complete with a cap and an ID badge.

(Like the flash drive, I'd obtained these items by submitting an intranet requisition form, then had them delivered to an empty cubicle on my floor.) I pulled off my indent jumpsuit and used it to wipe the blood off my ear and neck.

Then I removed two Band-Aids from under my mattress and slapped them over the holes in my earlobe.

Once I was dressed in my new maintenance-tech threads, I carefully removed the flash drive from its expansion slot and pocketed it.

Then I picked up my eargear and spoke into it.

"I need to use the bathroom,"

I said.

The hab-unit door irised open at my feet.

The hallway was dark and deserted.

I stuffed my eargear and indent jumpsuit under the mattress and put the anklet in the pocket of my new uniform.

Then, reminding myself to breathe, I crawled outside and descended the ladder.

I passed a few other indents on my way to the elevators, but as usual, none of them made eye contact.

This was a huge relief, because I was worried someone might recognize me and notice that I didn't belong in a maintenance-tech uniform.

When I stepped in front of the express elevator door, I held my breath as the system scanned my maintenance-tech ID badge.

After what felt like an eternity, the doors slid open.

"Good morning, Mr.

Tuttle,"

the elevator said as I stepped inside.

"Floor please?"

"Lobby,"

I said hoarsely, and the elevator began to descend.

"Harry Tuttle"

was the name printed on my maintenance tech ID badge.

I'd given the fictional Mr.

Tuttle complete access to the entire building, then reprogrammed my indent anklet so that it was encoded with the Tuttle ID, making it function just like one of the security bracelets that maintenance techs wore.

When the doors and elevators scanned me to make sure I had the proper security clearance, the anklet in my pocket told them that yes, I sure did, instead of doing what it was supposed to do, which was zap my ass with a few thousand volts and incapacitate me until the security guards arrived.

I rode the elevator down in silence, trying not to stare at the camera mounted above the doors.

Then I realized the video being shot of me would be scrutinized when this was all over.

Sorrento himself would probably see it, and so would his superiors.

So I looked directly into the lens of the camera, smiled, and scratched the bridge of my nose with my middle finger.

The elevator reached the lobby and the doors slid open.

I half expected to find an army of security guards waiting for me outside, their guns leveled at my face.

But there was only a crowd of IOI middle-management drones waiting to get on the elevator.

I stared at them blankly for a second, then stepped out of the car.

It was like crossing the border into another country.

A steady stream of overcaffeinated office workers scurried across the lobby and in and out of the elevators and exits.

These were regular employees, not indents.

They were allowed to go home at the end of their shifts.

They could even quit if they wanted to.

I wondered if it bothered any of them, knowing that thousands of indentured slaves lived and toiled here in the same building, just a few floors away from them.

I spotted two security guards stationed near the reception desk and gave them a wide berth, weaving my way through the thick crowd, crossing the immense lobby to the long row of automatic glass doors that led outside, to freedom.

I forced myself not to run as I pushed through the arriving workers.

Just a maintenance tech here, folks, heading home after a long night of rebooting routers.

That's all.

I am definitely not an indent making a daring escape with ten zettabytes of stolen company data in his pocket.

Nosiree.

Halfway to the doors, I noticed an odd sound and glanced down at my feet.

I was still wearing my disposable plastic indent slippers.

Each footfall made a shrill squeak on the waxed marble floor, standing out amid the rumble of sensible business footwear.

Every step I took seemed to scream: Hey, look!

Over here!

A guy in the plastic slippers!

But I kept walking.

I was almost to the doors when someone placed a hand on my shoulder.

I froze.

"Sir?"

I heard someone say.

It was a woman's voice.

I almost bolted out the door, but something about the woman's tone stopped me.

I turned and saw the concerned face of a tall woman in her midforties.

Dark blue business suit.

Briefcase.

"Sir, your ear is bleeding."

She pointed at it, wincing.

"A lot."

I reached up and touched my earlobe, and my hand came away red.

At some point, the Band-Aids I'd applied had fallen off.

I was paralyzed for a second, unsure of what to do.

I wanted to give her an explanation, but couldn't think of one.

So I simply nodded, muttered "thanks,"

then turned around and, as calmly as possible, walked outside.

The frozen morning wind was so fierce that it nearly knocked me over.

When I regained my balance, I bounded down the tiered steps, pausing briefly to drop my anklet into a trash receptacle.

I heard it hit the bottom with a satisfying thud.

Once I reached the street, I headed north, walking as fast as my feet would carry me.

I was somewhat conspicuous because I was the only person not wearing a coat of some kind.

My feet quickly went numb, because I also wasn't wearing socks under my plastic indent slippers.

My entire body was shivering by the time I finally reached the warm confines of the Mailbox, a post office box rental outlet located four blocks from the IOI plaza.

The week before my arrest, I'd rented a post office box here online and had a top-of-the-line portable OASIS rig shipped to it.

The Mailbox was completely automated, so there were no employees to contend with, and when I walked in there were no customers either.

I located my box, punched in the key code, and retrieved the portable OASIS rig.

I sat down on the floor and ripped open the package right there.

I rubbed my frozen hands together until the feeling returned to my fingers, then put on the gloves and visor and used the rig to log into the OASIS.

Gregarious Simulation Systems was located less than a mile away, so I was able to use one of their complimentary wireless access points instead of one of the city nodes owned by IOI.

My heart was pounding as I logged in.

I'd been offline for eight whole days- a personal record.

As my avatar slowly materialized on my stronghold's observation deck, I looked down at my virtual body, admiring it like a favorite suit I hadn't worn in a while.

A window immediately appeared on my display, informing me that I'd received several messages from Aech and Shoto.

And, to my surprise, there was even a message from Art3mis.

All three of them wanted to know where I was and what the hell had happened to me.

I replied to Art3mis first.

I told her that the Sixers knew who she was and where she lived and that they had her under constant surveillance.

I also warned her about their plans to abduct her from her home.

I pulled a copy of her dossier off the flash drive and attached it to my message as proof.

Then I politely suggested that she leave home immediately and get the hell out of Dodge.

Don't stop to pack a suitcase, I wrote.

Don't say good-bye to anyone.

Leave right now, and get somewhere safe.

Make sure you aren't followed.

Then find a secure non-IOI-controlled Internet connection and get back online.

I'll meet you in Aech's Basement as soon as I can.

Don't worry-I have some good news too.

At the bottom of the message, I added a short postscript: PS-I think you look even more beautiful in real life.

I sent similar e-mails to Shoto and Aech (minus the postscript), along with copies of their Sixer dossiers.

Then I pulled up the United States Citizen Registry database and attempted to log in.

To my great relief, the passwords I'd purchased still worked, and I was able to access the fake Bryce Lynch citizen profile I'd created.

It now contained the ID photo taken during my indent processing, and the words WANTED FUGITIVE were superimposed over my face.

IOI had already reported Mr.

Lynch as an escaped indent.

It didn't take me very long to completely erase the Bryce Lynch identity and copy my fingerprints and retinal patterns back over to my original citizen profile.

When I logged out of the database a few minutes later, Bryce Lynch no longer existed.

I was Wade Watts once again.

I hailed an autocab outside the Mailbox, making sure to select one operated by a local cab company and not a SupraCab, which was a wholly owned subsidiary of IOI.

When I got in, I held my breath as I pressed my thumb to the ID scanner.

The display flashed green.

The system recognized me as Wade Watts, not as the fugitive indent Bryce Lynch.

"Good morning, Mr.

Watts,"

the autocab said.

"Where to?"

I gave the cab the address of a clothing store on High Street, close to the OSU campus.

It was a place called Thr3ads, which specialized in "high-tech urban street wear."

I ran inside and bought a pair of jeans and a sweater.

Both items were "dichotomy wear,"

meaning they were wired for OASIS use.

They didn't have haptics, but the pants and shirt could link up with my portable immersion rig, letting it know what I was doing with my torso, arms, and legs, making it easier to control my avatar than with a gloves-only interface.

I also bought a few packs of socks and underwear, a simulated leather jacket, a pair of boots, and a black knit-wool cap to cover my freezing, stubble-covered noggin.

I emerged from the store a few minutes later dressed in my new threads.

As the frigid wind enveloped me again I zipped up my new jacket and pulled on the wool cap.

Much better.

I tossed the maintenance-tech jumpsuit and plastic indent shoes in a trash can, then began to walk up High Street, scanning the storefronts.

I kept my head down to avoid making eye contact with the stream of sullen university students filing past me.

A few blocks later, I ducked into a Vend-All franchise.

Inside there were rows of vending machines that sold everything under the sun.

One of them, labeled DEFENSE DISPENSER, offered self-defense equipment: lightweight body armor, chemical repellents, and a wide selection of handguns.

I tapped the screen set into the front of the machine and scrolled through the catalog.

After a moment's deliberation, I purchased a flak vest and a Glock 47C pistol, along with three clips of ammo.

I also bought a small canister of mace, then paid for everything by pressing my right palm to a hand scanner.

My identity was verified and my criminal record was checked.

NAME: WADE WATTS OUTSTANDING WARRANTS: NONE CREDIT RATING: EXCELLENT PURCHASE RESTRICTIONS: NONE TRANSACTION APPROVED!

THANK YOU FOR YOUR BUSINESS!

I heard a heavy metallic thunk as my purchases slid into the steel tray near my knees.

I pocketed the mace and put the flak vest on underneath my new shirt.

Then I removed the Glock from its clear plastic blister packaging.

This was the first time I'd ever held a real gun.

Even so, the weapon felt familiar in my hands, because I'd fired thousands of virtual firearms in the OASIS.

I pressed a small button set into the barrel and the gun emitted a tone.

I held the pistol grip firmly for a few seconds, first in my right hand, then my left.

The weapon emitted a second tone, letting me know it had finished scanning my handprints.

I was now the only person who could fire it.

The weapon had a built-in timer that would prevent it from firing for another twelve hours (a "cooling-off period"), but I still felt better having it on me.

I walked to an OASIS parlor located a few blocks away, a franchise outlet called the Plug.

The dingy backlit sign, which featured a smiling anthropomorphic fiber-optic cable, promised Lightning-Fast OASIS Access!

Cheap Gear Rental!

and Private Immersion Bays!

Open 24-7-365!

I'd seen a lot of banner ads for the Plug online.

They had a reputation for high prices and outdated hardware, but their connections were supposed to be fast, reliable, and lag-free.

For me, their major selling point was that they were one of the few OASIS parlor chains not owned by IOI or one of its subsidiaries.

The motion detector emitted a beep as I stepped through the front door.

There was a small waiting area off to my right, currently empty.

The carpet was stained and worn, and the whole place reeked of industrial-strength disinfectant.

A vacant-eyed clerk glanced up at me from behind a bulletproof Plexiglas barrier.

He was in his early twenties, with a Mohawk and dozens of facial piercings.

He was wearing a bifocal visor, which gave him a semitransparent view of the OASIS while also allowing him to see his real-world surroundings.

When he spoke, I saw that his teeth had all been sharpened to points.

"Welcome to the Plug,"

he said in a flat monotone.

"We have several bays free, so there's no waiting.

Package pricing information is displayed right here."

He pointed to the display screen mounted on the counter directly in front of me; then his eyes glazed over as he refocused his attention on the world inside his visor.

I scanned my choices.

A dozen immersion rigs were available, of varying quality and price.

Economy, Standard, Deluxe.

I was given detailed specs on each.

You could rent by the minute, or pay a flat hourly rate.

A visor and a pair of haptic gloves were included in the rental price, but a haptic suit cost extra.

The rental contract contained a lot of fine print about the additional charges you would incur if you damaged the equipment, and a lot of legalese stating that the Plug could not be held responsible for anything you did, under any circumstances, especially if it was something illegal.

"I'd like to rent one of the deluxe rigs for twelve hours,"

I said.

The clerk raised his visor.

"You have to pay in advance, you realize?"

I nodded.

"I also want to rent a fat-pipe connection.

I need to upload a large amount of data to my account."

"Uploading costs extra.

How much data?"

"Ten zettabytes."

I ignored the question.

"I also want the Mondo Upgrade Package,"

I said.

"Sure thing,"

the clerk replied warily.

"Your total comes to eleven thousand big ones.

Just put your thumb on the drum and we'll get you all fixed up."

He looked more than a little surprised when the transaction cleared.

Then he shrugged and handed me a key card, a visor, and some gloves.

"Bay fourteen.

Last door on your right.

The restroom is at the end of the hall.

If you leave any kind of mess in the bay, we'll have to keep your deposit.

Vomit, urine, semen, that kinda thing.

And I'm the guy who has to clean it up, so do me a solid and show some restraint, will ya?"

"You got it."

"Enjoy."

"Thanks."

Bay fourteen was a soundproofed ten-by-ten room with a late-model haptic rig in the center.

I locked the door behind me and climbed into the rig.

The vinyl on the haptic chair was worn and cracked.

I slid the data drive into a slot on the front of the OASIS console and smiled as it locked into place.

"Max?"

I said to the empty air, once I'd logged back in.

This booted up a backup of Max that I kept stored in my OASIS account.

Max's smiling face appeared on all of my command center monitors.

"H-h- hey there, compadre!"

he stuttered.

"H-h-how goes it?"

"Things are looking up, pal.

Now strap in.

We've got a lot of work to do."

I opened up my OASIS account manager and initiated the upload from my flash drive.

I paid GSS a monthly fee for unlimited data storage on my account, and I was about to test its limits.

Even using the Plug's high-bandwidth fiber- optic connection, the total estimated upload time for ten zettabytes of data was over three hours.

I reordered the upload sequence so the files I needed access to right away would get transferred first.

As soon as data was uploaded to my OASIS account I had immediate access to it and could also transfer it to other users instantaneously.

First, I e-mailed all of the major newsfeeds a detailed account of how IOI had tried to kill me, how they had killed Daito, and how they were planning to kill Art3mis and Shoto.

I attached one of the video clips I'd retrieved from the Sixer database to the message-the video camera footage of Daito's execution.

I also attached a copy of the memo Sorrento had sent to the IOI board, suggesting that they abduct Art3mis and Shoto.

Finally, I attached the simcap of my chatlink session with Sorrento, but I bleeped the part where he said my real name and blurred the image of my school photo.

I wasn't yet ready to reveal my true identity to the world.

I planned to release the unedited video later, once the rest of my plan had played out.

Then it wouldn't matter.

I spent about fifteen minutes composing one last e-mail, which I addressed to every single OASIS user.

Once I was happy with the wording, I stored it in my Drafts folder.

Then I logged into Aech's Basement.

When my avatar appeared inside the chat room, I saw that Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto were already there waiting for me.

"Z!"

Aech shouted as my avatar appeared.

"What the hell, man?

Where have you been?

I've been trying to reach you for over a week!"

"So have I,"

Shoto added.

"Where were you?

And how did you get those files from the Sixer database?"

"It's a long story,"

I said.

"First things first."

I addressed Shoto and Art3mis.

"Have you two left your homes?"

They both nodded.

"And you're each logged in from a safe location?"

"Yes,"

Shoto said.

"I'm in a manga cafe right now."

"And I'm at the Vancouver airport,"

Art3mis said.

It was the first time I'd heard her voice in months.

"I'm logged in from a germ-ridden public OASIS booth right now.

I ran out of my house with nothing but the clothes on my back, so I hope that Sixer data you sent us is legit."

"It is,"

I said.

"Trust me."

"How can you be sure of that?"

Shoto asked.

"Because I hacked into the Sixer Database and downloaded it myself."

They all stared at me in silence.

Aech raised an eyebrow.

"And how, exactly, did you manage that, Z?"

"I assumed a fake identity and masqueraded as an indentured servant to infiltrate IOI's corporate headquarters.

I've been there for the past eight days.

I just now escaped."

"Holy shit!"

Shoto whispered.

"Seriously?"

I nodded.

"Dude, you have balls of solid adamantium,"

Aech said.

"Respect."

"Thanks.

I think."

"Let's assume you're not totally bullshitting us,"

Art3mis said.

"How does a lowly indent get access to secret Sixer dossier files and company memos?"

I turned to face her.

"Indents have limited access to the company intranet via their hab-unit entertainment system, from behind the IOI firewall.

From there, I was able to use a series of back doors and system exploits left by the original programmers to tunnel through the network and hack directly into the Sixers' private database."

Shoto looked at me in awe.

"You did that?

All by yourself?"

"That is correct, sir."

"It's a miracle they didn't catch you and kill you,"

Art3mis said.

"Why would you take such a stupid risk?"

"Why do you think?

To try and find a way to get through their shield and reach the Third Gate."

I shrugged.

"It was the only plan I could come up with on such short notice."

"Z,"

Aech said, grinning, "you are one crazy son of a bitch."

He walked over and gave me a high five.

"But that's why I love you, man!"

Art3mis scowled at me.

"Of course, when you found out they had secret files on each of us, you just couldn't resist looking at them, could you?"

"I had to look at them!"

I said.

"To find out how much they knew about each of us!

You would have done the same thing."

She leveled a finger at me.

"No, I wouldn't have.

I respect other people's privacy!"

"Art3mis, chill out!"

Aech interjected.

"He probably saved your life, you know."

She seemed to consider this.

"Fine,"

she said.

"Forget it."

But I could tell she was still pissed off.

I didn't know what to say, so I kept plowing forward.

"I'm sending each of you a copy of all the Sixer data I smuggled out.

Ten zettabytes of it.

You should have it now."

I waited while each of them checked their inbox.

"The size of their database on Halliday is unreal.

His whole life is in there.

They've collected interviews with everyone Halliday ever knew.

It could take months to read through them all."

I waited for a few minutes, watching their eyes scan over the data.

"Whoa!"

Shoto said.

"This is incredible."

He looked over at me.

"How the hell did you escape from IOI with all of this stuff?"

"By being extra sneaky."

"Aech is right,"

Art3mis said, shaking her head.

"You are certifiably nuts."

She hesitated for a second, then added, "Thanks for the warning, Z.

I owe you one."

I opened my mouth to say "you're welcome,"

but no words came out.

"Yes,"

Shoto said.

"So do I.

Thanks."

"Don't mention it, guys,"

I finally managed to say.

"Well?"

Aech said.

"Hit us with the bad news already.

How close are the Sixers to clearing the Third Gate?"

"Dig this,"

I said, grinning.

"They haven't even figured out how to open it yet."

Art3mis and Shoto stared at me in disbelief.

Aech smiled wide, then began to bob his head and press his palms to the sky, as if dancing to some unheard rave track.

"Oh yes!

Oh yes!"

he sang.

"You're kidding, right?"

Shoto asked.

I shook my head.

"You're not kidding?"

Art3mis said.

"How is that possible?

Sorrento has the Crystal Key and he knows where the gate is.

All he has to do is open the damn thing and step inside, right?"

"That was true for the first two gates,"

I replied.

"But Gate Three is different."

I opened a large vidfeed window in the air beside me.

"Check this out.

It's from the Sixers' video archive.

It's a vidcap of their first attempt to open the gate."

I hit Play.

The video clip opened with a shot of Sorrento's avatar standing outside the front gates of Castle Anorak.

The castle's front entrance, which had been impregnable for so many years, swung open as Sorrento approached, like an automatic door at a supermarket.

"The castle entrance will open for an avatar who holds a copy of the Crystal Key,"

I explained.

"If an avatar doesn't have a copy of the key, he can't cross the threshold and enter the castle, even if the doors are already open."

We all watched the vidcap as Sorrento passed through the entrance and into the large gold-lined foyer that lay beyond.

Sorrento's avatar crossed the polished floor and approached the large crystal door set into the north wall.

There was a keyhole in the very center of the door, and directly above it, three words were etched into the door's glittering, faceted surface: CHARITY.

HOPE.

FAITH.

Sorrento stepped forward, holding out his copy of the Crystal Key.

He slid the key into the keyhole and turned it.

Nothing happened.

Sorrento glanced up at the three words printed on the gate.

"Charity, hope, faith,"

he said, reading them aloud.

Once again, nothing happened.

Sorrento removed the key, recited the three words again, then reinserted the key and turned it.

Still nothing.

I studied Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto as they watched the video.

Their excitement and curiosity had already shifted into concentration as they attempted to solve the puzzle before them.

I paused the video.

"Whenever Sorrento is logged in, he has a team of consultants and researchers watching his every move,"

I said.

"You can hear their voices on some of the vidcaps, feeding him suggestions and advice through his comlink.

So far, they haven't been much help.

Watch-"

On the video, Sorrento was making another attempt to open the gate.

He did everything exactly as before, except this time, when he inserted the Crystal Key, he turned it counterclockwise instead of clockwise.

"They try every asinine thing you can imagine,"

I said.

"Sorrento recites the words on the gate in Latin.

And Elvish.

And Klingon.

Then they get hung up on reciting First Corinthians 13:13, a Bible verse that contains the words 'charity, hope, and faith.' Apparently, 'charity, hope, and faith' are also the names of three martyred Catholic saints.

The Sixers have been trying to attach some significance to that for the past few days."

"Morons,"

Aech said.

"Halliday was an atheist."

"They're getting desperate now,"

I said.

"Sorrento has tried everything but genuflecting, doing a little dance, and sticking his pinky finger in the keyhole."

"That's probably next up on his agenda,"

Shoto said, grinning.

"Charity, hope, faith,"

Art3mis said, reciting the words slowly.

She turned to me.

"Where do I know that from?"

"Yeah,"

Aech said.

"Those words do sound familiar."

"It took me a while to place them too,"

I said.

They all looked at me expectantly.

"Say them in reverse order,"

I suggested.

"Better yet, sing them in reverse order."

Art3mis's eyes narrowed.

"Faith, hope, charity,"

she said.

She repeated them a few times, recognition growing in her face.

Then she sang: "Faith and hope and charity ..."

Aech picked up the next line: "The heart and the brain and the body ..."

"Give you three ...

as a magic number!"

Shoto finished triumphantly.

"Schoolhouse Rock!"

they all shouted in unison.

"See?"

I said.

"I knew you guys would get it.

You're a smart bunch."

"

'Three Is a Magic Number,' music and lyrics by Bob Dorough,"

Art3mis recited, as if pulling the information from a mental encyclopedia.

"Written in 1973."

I smiled at her.

"I have a theory.

I think this might be Halliday's way of telling us how many keys are required to open the Third Gate."

Art3mis grinned, then sang, "It takes three."

"No more, no less,"

continued Shoto.

"You don't have to guess,"

added Aech.

"Three,"

I finished, "is the magic number."

I took out my own copy of the Crystal Key and held it up.

The others did the same.

"We have four copies of the key.

If at least three of us can reach the gate, we can get it open."

"What then?"

Aech asked.

"Do we all enter the gate at the same time?"

"What if only one of us can enter the gate once it's open?"

Art3mis said.

"I doubt Halliday would have set it up like that,"

I said.

"Who knows what that crazy bastard was thinking?"

Art3mis said.

"He's toyed with us every step of the way, and now he's doing it again.

Why else would he require three copies of the Crystal Key to open the final gate?"

"Maybe because he wanted to force us to work together?"

I suggested.

"Or he just wanted the contest to end with a big, dramatic finale,"

Aech offered.

"Think about it.

If three avatars enter the Third Gate at the exact same moment, then it becomes a race to see who can clear the gate and reach the egg first."

"Halliday was one crazy, sadistic bastard,"

Art3mis muttered.

"Yeah,"

Aech said, nodding.

"You got that right."

"Look at it this way,"

Shoto said.

"If Halliday hadn't set up the Third Gate to require three keys ...

the Sixers might have already found the egg by now."

"But the Sixers have a dozen avatars with copies of the Crystal Key,"

Aech said.

"They could open the gate right now, if they were smart enough to figure out how."

"Dilettantes,"

Art3mis said.

"It's their own fault for not knowing all the Schoolhouse Rock!

lyrics by heart.

How did those fools even get this far?"

"By cheating,"

I said.

"Remember?"

"Oh, that's right.

I keep forgetting."

She grinned at me, and I felt my knees go all rubbery.

"Just because the Sixers haven't opened the gate yet doesn't mean they won't figure it out eventually,"

Shoto said.

I nodded.

"Shoto's right.

Sooner or later they'll make the Schoolhouse Rock!

connection.

So we can't waste any more time."

"Well, what are we waiting for?"

Shoto said excitedly.

"We know where the gate is and how to open it!

So let's do it!

And may the best gunter win!"

"You're forgetting something, Shoto-san,"

Aech said.

"Parzival here still hasn't told us how we're going to get past that shield, fight our way through the Sixers' army, and get inside the castle."

He turned to me.

"You do have a plan for that, don't you, Z?"

"Of course,"

I said.

"I was just getting to that."

I made a sweeping gesture with my right hand, and a three-dimensional hologram of Castle Anorak appeared, floating in the air in front of me.

The transparent blue sphere generated by the Orb of Osuvox appeared around the castle, surrounding it both above- and belowground.

I pointed to it.

"This shield is going to drop on its own, at noon on Monday, about thirty-six hours from now.

And then we're going to walk right through the castle's front entrance."

"The shield is going to drop?

On its own?"

Art3mis repeated.

"The clans have been lobbing nukes at that sphere for the past two weeks, and they haven't even scratched it.

How are you going to get it to 'drop on its own'?"

"I've already taken care of it,"

I said.

"You guys are gonna have to trust me."

"I trust you, Z,"

Aech said.

"But even if that shield does drop, to reach the castle, we'll still have to fight our way through the largest army in the OASIS."

He pointed to the hologram, which showed the Sixer troop positions around the castle, just inside the sphere.

"What about these fools?

And their tanks?

And their gunships?"

"Obviously, we're going to need a little help,"

I said.

"A lot of help,"

Art3mis clarified.

"And who, exactly, are we going to convince to help us wage war against the entire Sixer army?"

Aech asked.

"Everyone,"

I said.

"Every single gunter on the grid."

I opened another window, displaying the brief e-mail I'd composed just before logging into the Basement.

"I'm going to send this message out tonight, to every single OASIS user."

Fellow gunters, It is a dark day.

After years of deception, exploitation, and knavery, the Sixers have finally managed to buy and cheat their way to the entrance of the Third Gate.

As you know, IOI has barricaded Castle Anorak in an attempt to prevent anyone else from reaching the egg.

We've also learned that they've used illegal methods to uncover the identities of gunters they consider a threat, with the intention of abducting and murdering them.

If gunters around the world don't join forces to stop the Sixers, they will reach the egg and win the contest.

And then the OASIS will fall under IOI's imperialist rule.

The time is now.

Our assault on the Sixer army will begin tomorrow at noon, OST.

Join us!

Sincerely, Aech, Art3mis, Parzival, and Shoto "Knavery?"

Art3mis said after she'd finished reading it.

"Were you using a thesaurus when you wrote this?"

"I was trying to make it sound, you know, grand,"

I said.

"Official."

"Me likey, Z,"

Aech said.

"It really gets the blood stirring."

"Thanks, Aech."

"So that's it?

This is your plan?"

Art3mis said.

"Spam the entire OASIS, asking for help?"

"More or less, yeah.

That's the plan."

"And you really think everyone will just show up and help us fight the Sixers?"

she said.

"Just for the hell of it?"

"Yes,"

I said.

"I do."

Aech nodded.

"He's right.

No one wants the Sixers to win the contest.

And they definitely don't want IOI to take control of the OASIS.

People will jump at a chance to help bring the Sixers down.

And what gunter is gonna pass up a chance to fight in such an epic, history-making battle?"

"But won't the clans think we're just trying to manipulate them?"

Shoto said.

"So that we can reach the gate ourselves?"

"Of course,"

I said.

"But most of them have already given up.

Everyone knows the end of the Hunt is at hand.

Don't you think most people would rather see one of us win the contest, instead of Sorrento and the Sixers?"

Art3mis considered it for a moment.

"You're right.

That e-mail just might work."

"Z,"

Aech said, slapping me on the back, "you are an evil, sublime genius!

When that e-mail goes out, the media will go apeshit!

The word will spread like wildfire.

By this time tomorrow, every avatar in the OASIS will be headed to Chthonia."

"Let's hope so,"

I said.

"Oh, they'll show up, all right,"

Art3mis said.

"But how many of them will actually fight, once they see what we're up against?

Most of them will probably set up lawn chairs and eat popcorn while they watch us get our asses kicked."

"That's definitely a possibility,"

I said.

"But the clans will help us, for sure.

They've got nothing to lose.

And we don't have to defeat the entire Sixer army.

We just have to punch a hole through it, get inside the castle, and reach the gate."

"Three of us have to reach the gate,"

Aech said.

"If only one or two of us make it inside, we're screwed."

"Correct,"

I said.

"So we should all try extremely hard not to get killed."

Art3mis and Aech both laughed nervously.

Shoto just shook his head.

"Even if we get the gate open, we still have to contend with the gate itself,"

he said.

"It's bound to be harder to clear than the first two."

"Let's worry about the gate later,"

I said.

"Once we reach it."

"Fine,"

Shoto said.

"Let's do this thing."

"I second that,"

Aech said.

"So, you two are actually gonna go along with this?"

Art3mis said.

"You got a better idea, sister?"

Aech asked.

She shrugged.

"No.

Not really."

"OK then,"

Aech said.

"It's settled."

I closed the e-mail.

"I'm sending each of you a copy of this message,"

I said.

"Start sending it out tonight, to everyone on your contact list.

Post it on your blogs.

Broadcast it on your POV channels.

We've got thirty-six hours to spread the word.

That should be enough time for everyone to gear up and get their avatars to Chthonia."

"As soon as the Sixers catch wind of this, they'll start preparing for an assault,"

Art3mis said.

"They're gonna pull out all the stops."

"They might just laugh it off,"

I said.

"They think their shield is impregnable."

"It is,"

Art3mis said.

"So I hope you're right about being able to shut it down."

"Don't worry."

"Why would I be worried?"

Art3mis snapped.

"Maybe you've forgotten, but I'm homeless and on the run for my life right now!

I'm currently logged in from a public terminal at an airport, paying for bandwidth by the minute.

I can't fight a war from here, much less try to clear the Third Gate.

And I don't have anywhere to go."

Shoto nodded.

"I don't think I can stay where I am either.

I'm in a rented booth at a public manga cafe in Osaka.

I don't have much privacy.

And I don't think it's safe for me to stay here if the Sixers have agents out looking for me."

Art3mis looked at me.

"Any suggestions?"

"I hate to break it to you guys, but I'm homeless and logged in from a public terminal right now too,"

I said.

"I've been hiding out from the Sixers for over a year, remember?"

"I've got an RV,"

Aech said.

"You're all welcome to crash with me.

But I don't think I can make it to Columbus, Vancouver, and Japan in the next thirty- six hours."

"I think I might be able to help you guys out,"

a deep voice said.

We all jumped and turned around just in time to see a tall, male, gray-haired avatar appear directly behind us.

It was the Great and Powerful Og.

Ogden Morrow's avatar.

And he didn't materialize slowly, the way an avatar normally did when logging into a chat room.

He simply popped into existence, as if he had been there all along and had only now decided to make himself visible.

"Have any of you ever been to Oregon?"

he said.

"It's lovely this time of year."

We all stared at Ogden Morrow in stunned silence.

"How did you get in here?"

Aech finally asked, once he'd managed to pick his jaw up off the floor.

"This is a private chat room."

"Yes, I know,"

Morrow said, looking a bit embarrassed.

"I'm afraid I've been eavesdropping on the four of you for quite some time now.

And I hope you'll accept my sincere apologies for invading your privacy.

I did it with only the best intentions, I promise you."

"With all due respect, sir,"

Art3mis said.

"You didn't answer his question.

How did you gain access to this chat room without an invitation?

And without any of us even knowing you were here?"

"Forgive me,"

he said.

"I can see why this might concern you.

But you needn't worry.

My avatar has many unique powers, including the ability to enter private chat rooms uninvited."

As Morrow spoke, he walked over to one of Aech's bookshelves and began to browse through some vintage role-playing game supplements.

"Prior to the original launch of the OASIS, when Jim and I created our avatars, we gave ourselves superuser access to the entire simulation.

In addition to being immortal and invincible, our avatars could go pretty much anywhere and do pretty much anything.

Now that Anorak is gone, my avatar is the only one with these powers."

He turned to face the four of us.

"No one else has the ability to eavesdrop on you.

Especially not the Sixers.

OASIS chat-room encryption protocols are rock solid, I assure you."

He chuckled lightly.

"My presence here notwithstanding."

"He knocked over that stack of comic books!"

I said to Aech.

"After our first meeting in here, remember?

I told you it wasn't a software glitch."

Og nodded and gave us a guilty shrug.

"That was me.

I can be pretty clumsy at times."

There was another brief silence, during which I finally worked up the courage to speak to Morrow directly.

"Mr.

Morrow-,"

I began.

"Please,"

Morrow said, raising a hand.

"Call me Og."

"All right,"

I said, laughing nervously.

Even under the circumstances, I was completely starstruck.

I couldn't believe I was actually addressing the Ogden Morrow.

"Og.

Would you mind telling us why you've been eavesdropping on us?"

"Because I want to help you,"

he replied.

"And from what I heard a moment ago, it sounds as though you could all use my help."

We all exchanged nervous looks, and Og seemed to detect our skepticism.

"Please, don't misunderstand me,"

he continued.

"I'm not going to give you any clues, or provide you with any information to help you reach the egg.

That would ruin all the fun, wouldn't it?"

He walked back over to us, and his tone turned serious.

"Just before he died, I promised Jim that, in his absence, I would do everything I could to protect the spirit and integrity of his contest.

That's why I'm here."

"But, sir-Og,"

I said.

"In your autobiography, you wrote that you and James Halliday didn't speak during the last ten years of his life."

Morrow gave me an amused smile.

"Come on, kid,"

he said.

"You can't believe everything you read."

He laughed.

"Actually, that statement was mostly true.

I didn't speak with Jim for the last decade of his life.

Not until just a few weeks before he died."

He paused, as if calling up the memory.

"At the time, I didn't even know he was sick.

He just called me up out of the blue, and we met in a private chat room, much like this one.

Then he told me about his illness, the contest, and what he had planned.

He was worried there might still be a few bugs in the gates.

Or that complications might arise after he was gone that would prevent the contest from proceeding as he'd intended."

"You mean like the Sixers?"

Shoto asked.

"Exactly,"

Og said.

"Like the Sixers.

So Jim asked me to monitor the contest, and to intervene if it ever became necessary."

He scratched his beard.

"To be honest, I didn't really want the responsibility.

But it was the dying wish of my oldest friend, so I agreed.

And for the past six years, I've watched from the sidelines.

And even though the Sixers have done everything to stack the odds against you, somehow you four have persevered.

But now, after hearing you describe your current circumstances, I think the time has finally come for me to take action, to maintain the integrity of Jim's game."

Art3mis, Shoto, Aech, and I all exchanged looks of amazement, as if seeking reassurance from one another that this was all really happening.

"I want to offer the four of you sanctuary at my home here in Oregon,"

Og said.

"From here, you'll be able to execute your plan and complete your quest in safety, without having to worry about Sixer agents tracking you down and kicking in your door.

I can provide each of you with a state-of-the-art immersion rig, a fiber-optic connection to the OASIS, and anything else you might need."

Another stunned silence.

"Thank you, sir!"

I finally blurted out, resisting the urge to fall to my knees and bow repeatedly.

"It's the least I can do."

"That's an incredibly kind offer, Mr.

Morrow,"

Shoto said.

"But I live in Japan."

"I know, Shoto,"

Og said.

"I've already chartered a private jet for you.

It's waiting at the Osaka airport.

If you send me your current location, I'll arrange for a limo to pick you up and take you to the runway."

Shoto was speechless for a second; then he bowed low.

"Arigato, Morrow- san."

"Don't mention it, kid."

He turned to Art3mis.

"Young lady, I understand that you're currently at the Vancouver airport?

I've made travel arrangements for you, as well.

A driver is currently waiting for you in the baggage claim area, holding a sign with the name 'Benatar' on it.

He'll take you to the plane I've chartered for you."

For a second I thought Art3mis might bow too.

But then she ran over and threw her arms around Og in a bear hug.

"Thank you, Og,"

she said.

"Thank you, thank you, thank you!"

"You're welcome, dear,"

he said with an embarrassed laugh.

When she finally released him, he turned to Aech and me.

"Aech, I understand that you have a vehicle, and that you're currently in the vicinity of Pittsburgh?"

Aech nodded.

"If you wouldn't mind driving to Columbus to retrieve your friend Parzival here, I'll arrange for a jet to pick up both of you at the Columbus airport.

That is, if you boys don't mind sharing a ride?"

"No, that sounds perfect,"

Aech said, glancing at me sideways.

"Thanks, Og."

"Yes, thank you,"

I repeated.

"You're a lifesaver."

"I hope so."

He gave me a grim smile, then turned to address everyone.

"Safe travels, all of you.

I'll see you soon."

And then he vanished, just as quickly as he'd appeared.

"Well, this blows,"

I said, turning to Aech.

"Art3mis and Shoto get limos, and I have to bum a ride to the airport with your ugly ass?

In some shit-heap RV?"

"It's not a shit-heap,"

Aech said, laughing.

"And you're welcome to take a cab, asshole."

"This is gonna be interesting,"

I said, stealing a quick glance at Art3mis.

"The four of us are finally going to meet in person."

"It will be an honor,"

Shoto said.

"I'm looking forward to it."

"Yeah,"

Art3mis said, locking eyes with me.

"I can't wait."

After Shoto and Art3mis logged out, I gave Aech my current location.

"It's a Plug franchise.

Call me when you get here, and I'll meet you out front."

"Will do,"

he said.

"Listen, I should warn you.

I don't look anything like my avatar."

"So?

Who does?

I'm not really this tall.

Or muscular.

And my nose is slightly bigger-"

"I'm just warning you.

Meeting me might be ...

kind of a shock for you."

"OK.

Then why don't you just tell me what you look like right now?"

"I'm already on the road,"

he said, ignoring my question.

"I'll see you in a few hours, OK?"

"OK.

Drive safe, amigo."

Despite what I'd said to Aech, knowing that I was about to meet him in person after all these years made me more nervous than I wanted to admit.

But it was nothing compared to the apprehension I already felt building inside me at the prospect of meeting Art3mis once we reached Oregon.

Trying to picture the actual moment filled me with a mixture of excitement and abject terror.

What would she be like in person?

Was the photo I'd seen in her file actually a fake?

Did I still have any kind of chance with her at all?

With a Herculean effort, I managed to put her out of my mind by forcing myself to focus on the approaching battle.

As soon as I logged out of Aech's Basement, I sent out my "Call to Arms"

e- mail as a global announcement to every OASIS user.

Knowing most of those e- mails wouldn't get through the spam filters, I also posted it to every gunter message board.

Then I made a short vidcap recording of my avatar reading it aloud and set it to run on a continuous loop on my POV channel.

The word spread quickly.

Within an hour, our plan to assault Castle Anorak was the top story on every single newsfeed, accompanied by headlines like GUNTERS DECLARE ALL-OUT WAR ON THE SIXERS and TOP GUNTERS ACCUSE IOI OF KIDNAPPING AND MURDER and IS THE HUNT FOR HALLIDAY'S EGG FINALLY OVER?

Some of the newsfeeds were already running the video clip of Daito's murder I'd sent them, along with the text of Sorrento's memo, citing an anonymous source for both.

So far, IOI had declined to comment on either.

By now, Sorrento would know I'd somehow gained access to the Sixers' private database.

I wished I could see his face when he learned how I'd done it-that I'd spent an entire week just a few floors below his office.

I spent the next few hours outfitting my avatar and preparing myself mentally for what was to come.

When I could no longer keep my eyes open, I decided to catch a quick nap while I waited for Aech to arrive.

I disabled the auto-log-out feature on my account, then drifted off in the haptic chair with my new jacket draped over me as a blanket, clutching in one hand the pistol I'd purchased earlier that day.

I woke with a start sometime later to the sound of Aech's ringtone.

He was calling to let me know he'd arrived outside.

I climbed out of the rig, collected my things, and returned the rented gear at the front desk.

When I stepped out into the street, I saw that night had fallen.

The frozen air hit me like a bucket of ice water.

Aech's tiny RV was just a few yards away, parked at the curb.

It was a mocha- colored SunRider, about twenty feet long, and at least two decades old.

A patchwork of solar cells covered the RV's roof and most of its body, along with a liberal amount of rust.

The windows were tinted black, so I couldn't see inside.

I took a deep breath and crossed the slush-covered sidewalk, feeling a strange combination of dread and excitement.

As I approached the RV, a door near the center of the right side slid open and a short stepladder extended to the pavement.

I climbed inside and the door slid shut behind me.

I found myself in the RV's tiny kitchen.

It was dark except for the running lights set into the carpeted floor.

To my left, I saw a small bedroom area at the back, wedged into a loft above the RV's battery compartment.

I turned and walked slowly across the darkened kitchen, then pulled back the beaded curtain covering the doorway to the cab.

A heavyset African American girl sat in the RV's driver seat, clutching the wheel tightly and staring straight ahead.

She was about my age, with short, kinky hair and chocolate-colored skin that appeared iridescent in the soft glow of the dashboard indicators.

She was wearing a vintage Rush 2112 concert T-shirt, and the numbers were warped around her large bosom.

She also had on faded black jeans and a pair of studded combat boots.

She appeared to be shivering, even though it was nice and warm in the cab.

I stood there for a moment, staring at her in silence, waiting for her to acknowledge my presence.

Eventually, she turned and smiled at me, and it was a smile I recognized immediately.

That Cheshire grin I'd seen thousands of times before, on the face of Aech's avatar, during the countless nights we'd spent together in the OASIS, telling bad jokes and watching bad movies.

And her smile wasn't the only thing I found familiar.

I also recognized the set of her eyes and the lines of her face.

There was no doubt in my mind.

The young woman sitting in front of me was my best friend, Aech.

A wave of emotion washed over me.

Shock gave way to a sense of betrayal.

How could he-she-deceive me all these years?

I felt my face flush with embarrassment as I remembered all of the adolescent intimacies I'd shared with Aech.

A person I'd trusted implicitly.

Someone I thought I knew.

When I didn't say anything, her eyes dropped to her boots and stayed on them.

I sat down heavily in the passenger seat, still staring over at her, still unsure of what to say.

She kept stealing glances at me; then her eyes would dart away nervously.

She was still trembling.

Whatever anger or betrayal I felt quickly evaporated.

I couldn't help myself.

I started to laugh.

There was no meanness in it, and I knew she could tell that, because her shoulders relaxed a bit and she let out a relieved sigh.

Then she started to laugh too.

Half laughing and half crying, I thought.

"Hey, Aech,"

I said, once our laughter subsided.

"How goes it?"

"It's going good, Z,"

she said.

"All sunshine and rainbows."

Her voice was familiar too.

Just not quite as deep as it was online.

All this time, she'd been using software to disguise it.

"Well,"

I said.

"Look at us.

Here we are."

"Yeah,"

Aech replied.

"Here we are."

An uncomfortable silence descended.

I hesitated a moment, unsure of what to do.

Then I followed my instincts, crossed the small space between us, and put my arms around her.

"It's good to see you, old friend,"

I said.

"Thanks for coming to get me."

She returned the hug.

"It's good to see you too,"

she said.

And I could tell she meant it.

I let go of her and stepped back.

"Christ, Aech,"

I said, smiling.

"I knew you were hiding something.

But I never imagined ..."

"What?"

she said, a bit defensively.

"You never imagined what?"

"That the famous Aech, renowned gunter and the most feared and ruthless arena combatant in the entire OASIS, was, in reality, a ..."

"A fat black chick?"

"I was going to say 'young African American woman.' "

Her expression darkened.

"There's a reason I never told you, you know."

"And I'm sure it's a good one,"

I said.

"But it really doesn't matter."

"It doesn't?"

"Of course not.

You're my best friend, Aech.

My only friend, to be honest."

"Well, I still want to explain."

"OK.

But can it wait until we're in the air?"

I said.

"We've got a long way to travel.

And I'll feel a lot safer once we've left this city in the dust."

"We're on our way, amigo,"

she said, putting the RV in gear.

Aech followed Og's directions to a private hangar near the Columbus airport, where a small luxury jet was waiting for us.

Og had arranged for Aech's RV to be stored in a nearby hangar, but it had been her home for many years, and I could tell she was nervous about leaving it behind.

We both stared at the jet in wonder as we approached it.

I'd seen airplanes in the sky before, of course, but I'd never seen one up close.

Traveling by jet was something only rich people could afford.

That Og could afford to charter three different jets to retrieve us without batting an eyelash was a testament to just how insanely wealthy he must be.

The jet was completely automated, so there was no crew on board.

We were all alone.

The placid voice of the autopilot welcomed us aboard, then told us to strap in and prepare for takeoff.

We were up in the air within minutes.

It was the first time either of us had ever flown, and we both spent the first hour of the flight staring out the windows, overwhelmed by the view, as we hurtled westward through the atmosphere at ten thousand feet, on our way to Oregon.

Finally, once some of the novelty had worn off, I could tell that Aech was ready to talk.

"OK, Aech,"

I said.

"Tell me your story."

She flashed her Cheshire grin and took a deep breath.

"The whole thing was originally my mother's idea,"

she said.

Then she launched into an abbreviated version of her life story.

Her real name, she said, was Helen Harris, and she was only a few months older than I was.

She'd grown up in Atlanta, raised by a single mother.

Her father had died in Afghanistan when she was still a baby.

Her mother, Marie, worked from home, in an online data-processing center.

In Marie's opinion, the OASIS was the best thing that had ever happened to both women and people of color.

From the very start, Marie had used a white male avatar to conduct all of her online business, because of the marked difference it made in how she was treated and the opportunities she was given.

When Aech first logged into the OASIS, she followed her mother's advice and created a Caucasian male avatar.

"H"

had been her mother's nickname for her since she was a baby, so she'd decided to use it as the name of her online persona.

A few years later, when she started attending school online, her mother lied about her daughter's race and gender on the application.

Aech was required to provide a photo for her school profile, so she'd submitted a photorealistic rendering of her male avatar's face, which she'd modeled after her own features.

Aech told me that she hadn't seen or spoken to her mother since leaving home on her eighteenth birthday.

That was the day Aech had finally come out to her mother about her sexuality.

At first, her mother refused to believe she was gay.

But then Helen revealed that she'd been dating a girl she met online for nearly a year.

As Aech explained all of this, I could tell she was studying my reaction.

I wasn't all that surprised, really.

Over the past few years, Aech and I had discussed our mutual admiration for the female form on numerous occasions.

I was actually relieved to know that Aech hadn't been deceiving me, at least not on that account.

"How did your mother react when she found out you had a girlfriend?"

I asked.

"Well, it turns out that my mother had her own set of deep-seated prejudices,"

Aech said.

"She kicked me out of the house and said she never wanted to see me again.

I was homeless for a little while.

I lived in a series of shelters.

But eventually I earned enough competing in the OASIS arena leagues to buy my RV, and I've been living in it ever since.

I usually only stop moving when the RV's batteries need to recharge."

As we continued to talk, going through the motions of getting to know each other, I realized that we already did know each other, as well as any two people could.

We'd known each other for years, in the most intimate way possible.

We'd connected on a purely mental level.

I understood her, trusted her, and loved her as a dear friend.

None of that had changed, or could be changed by anything as inconsequential as her gender, or skin color, or sexual orientation.

The rest of the flight seemed to go by in a blink.

Aech and I quickly fell into our old familiar rhythm, and before long it was like we were back in the Basement, trash-talking each other over a game of Quake or Joust.

Any fears I had about the resiliency of our friendship in the real world had vanished by the time our jet touched down on Og's private runway in Oregon.

We'd been flying west across the country, just a few hours ahead of the sunrise, so it was still dark when we landed.

Aech and I both froze in our tracks as we stepped off the plane, gazing in wonder at the scene around us.

Even in the dim moonlight, the view was breathtaking.

The dark, towering silhouettes of the Wallowa Mountains surrounded us on all sides.

Rows of blue runway lights stretched out along the valley floor behind us, delineating Og's private landing strip.

Directly ahead, a steep cobblestone staircase at the edge of the runway led up to a grand, floodlit mansion constructed on a plateau near the base of the mountain range.

Several waterfalls were visible in the distance, spilling off the peaks beyond Morrow's mansion.

"It looks just like Rivendell,"

Aech said, taking the words right out of my mouth.

I nodded.

"It looks exactly like Rivendell in the Lord of the Rings movies,"

I said, still staring up at it in awe.

"Og's wife was a big Tolkien fan, remember?

He built this place for her."

We heard an electric hum behind us as the jet's staircase retracted and the hatch closed.

The engines powered back up and the jet rotated, preparing to take off again.

We stood and watched it launch back up into the clear, starry sky.

Then we turned and began to mount the staircase leading up to the house.

When we finally reached the top, Ogden Morrow was there waiting for us.

"Welcome, my friends!"

Og bellowed, extending both his hands in greeting.

He was dressed in a plaid bathrobe and bunny slippers.

"Welcome to my home!"

"Thank you, sir,"

Aech said.

"Thanks for inviting us here."

"Ah, you must be Aech,"

he replied, clasping her hand.

If he was surprised by her appearance, he didn't show it.

"I recognize your voice."

He gave her a wink, followed by a bear hug.

Then he turned and hugged me, too.

"And you must be Wade-I mean, Parzival!

Welcome!

Welcome!

It's truly an honor to meet you both!"

"The honor is ours,"

I said.

"We really can't thank you enough for helping us."

"You've already thanked me enough, so stop it!"

he said.

He turned and led us across an expansive green lawn, toward his enormous house.

"I can't tell you how good it is to have visitors.

Sad to say, I've been all alone here since Kira died."

He was silent a moment; then he laughed.

"Alone except for my cooks, maids, and gardeners, of course.

But they all live here too, so they don't really count as visitors."

Neither I nor Aech knew how to reply, so we just kept smiling and nodding.

Eventually, I worked up the courage to speak.

"Have the others arrived yet?

Shoto and Art3mis?"

Something about the way I said "Art3mis"

made Morrow chuckle, long and loud.

After a few seconds, I realized Aech was laughing at me too.

"What?"

I said.

"What's so funny?"

"Yes,"

Og said, grinning.

"Art3mis arrived first, several hours ago, and Shoto's plane got here about thirty minutes before you arrived."

"Are we going to meet them now?"

I asked, doing an extremely poor job of hiding my apprehension.

Og shook his head.

"Art3mis felt that meeting you two right now would be an unnecessary distraction.

She wanted to wait until after the 'big event.' And Shoto seemed to agree."

He studied me for a moment.

"It probably is for the best, you know.

You've all got a big day ahead of you."

I nodded, feeling a strange combination of relief and disappointment.

"Where are they now?"

Aech asked.

Og raised a fist triumphantly in the air.

"They're already logged in, preparing for your assault on the Sixers!"

His voice echoed across the grounds and off the high stone walls of his mansion.

"Follow me!

The hour draws near!"

Og's enthusiasm pulled me back into the moment, and I felt a nervous knot form in the pit of my stomach.

We followed our bathrobed benefactor across the expansive moonlit courtyard.

As we approached the main house, we passed a small gated-in garden filled with flowers.

The garden was in a strange location, and I couldn't figure out its purpose until I saw the large tombstone at its center.

Then I realized it must be Kira Morrow's grave.

But even in the bright moonlight, it was still too dark for me to make out the inscription on the headstone.

Og led us through the mansion's lavish front entrance.

The lights were off inside, but instead of turning them on, Morrow took an honest-to-God torch off the wall and used it to illuminate our way.

Even in dim torchlight, the grandeur of the place amazed me.

Giant tapestries and a huge collection of fantasy artwork covered the walls, while gargoyle statues and suits of armor lined the hallways.

As we followed Og, I worked up enough courage to speak to him.

"Listen, I know this probably isn't the time,"

I said.

"But I'm a huge fan of your work.

I grew up playing Halcydonia Interactive's educational games.

They taught me how to read, write, do math, solve puzzles ..."

I proceeded to ramble on as we walked, raving about all of my favorite Halcydonia titles and geeking out on Og in a classically embarrassing fashion.

Aech must have thought I was brown-nosing, because she snickered throughout my stammering monologue, but Og was very cool about it.

"That's wonderful to hear,"

he said, seeming genuinely pleased.

"My wife and I were very proud of those games.

I'm so glad you have fond memories of them."

We rounded a corner, and Aech and I both froze before the entrance of a giant room filled with row after row of old videogames.

We both knew it must be James Halliday's classic videogame collection-the collection he'd willed to Morrow after his death.

Og glanced around and saw us lingering by the entrance, then hurried back to retrieve us.

"I promise to give you a tour later, when all the excitement is over,"

Og said, his breathing a bit labored.

He was moving quickly for a man his age and size.

He led us down a spiral stone staircase to an elevator that carried us down several more floors to Og's basement.

The decor here was much more modern.

We followed Og through a maze of carpeted hallways until we reached a row of seven circular doorways, each numbered.

"And here we are!"

Morrow said, gesturing with the torch.

"These are my OASIS immersion bays.

They're all top-of-the-line Habashaw rigs.

OIR-Ninety- four hundreds."

"Ninety-four hundreds?

No kidding?"

Aech let out a low whistle.

"Wicked."

"Where are the others?"

I asked, looking around nervously.

"Art3mis and Shoto are already in bays two and three,"

he said.

"Bay one is mine.

You two can take your pick of the others."

I stared at the doors, wondering which one Art3mis was behind.

Og motioned to the end of the hall.

"You'll find haptic suits of all sizes in the dressing rooms.

Now, get yourselves suited and booted!"

He smiled wide when Aech and I emerged from the dressing rooms a few minutes later, each dressed in brand-new haptic suits and gloves.

"Excellent!"

Og said.

"Now grab a bay and log in.

The clock is ticking!"

Aech turned to face me.

I could tell she wanted to say something, but words seemed to fail her.

After a few seconds she stuck out her gloved hand.

I took it.

"Good luck, Aech,"

I said.

"Good luck, Z,"

she replied.

Then she turned to Og and said, "Thanks again, Og."

Before he could respond, she stood on her tiptoes and kissed him on the cheek.

Then she disappeared through the door to bay four and it hissed shut behind her.

Og grinned after her, then turned to face me.

"The whole world is rooting for the four of you.

Try not to let them down."

"We'll do our best."

"I know you will."

He offered me his hand and I shook it.

I took a step toward my immersion bay, then turned back.

"Og, can I ask you one question?"

I said.

He raised an eyebrow.

"If you're going to ask me what's inside the Third Gate, I have no idea,"

he said.

"And even if I did, I wouldn't tell you.

You should know that...."

I shook my head.

"No, that's not it.

I wanted to ask what it was that ended your friendship with Halliday.

In all the research I've done, I've never been able to find out.

What happened?"

Morrow studied me for a moment.

He'd been asked this question in interviews many times before and had always ignored it.

I don't know why he decided to tell me.

Maybe he'd been waiting all these years to tell someone.

"It was because of Kira.

My wife."

He paused a moment, then cleared his throat and continued.

"Like me, he'd been in love with her since high school.

Of course, he never had the courage to act on it.

So she never knew how he felt about her.

And neither did I.

He didn't tell me about it until the last time I spoke to him, right before he died.

Even then, it was hard for him to communicate with me.

Jim was never very good with people, or with expressing his emotions."

I nodded silently and waited for him to continue.

"Even after Kira and I got engaged, I think Jim still harbored some fantasy of stealing her away from me.

But once we got married, he abandoned that notion.

He told me he'd stopped speaking to me because of the overwhelming jealousy he felt.

Kira was the only woman he ever loved."

Morrow's voice caught in his throat.

"I can understand why Jim felt that way.

Kira was very special.

It was impossible not to fall in love with her."

He smiled at me.

"You know what it's like to meet someone like that, don't you?"

"I do,"

I said.

Then, when I realized he had no more to say on the subject, I said, "Thank you, Mr.

Morrow.

Thank you for telling me all of that."

"You're quite welcome,"

he said.

Then he walked over to his immersion bay, and the door irised open.

Inside, I could see that his rig had been modified to include several strange components, including an OASIS console modified to look like a vintage Commodore 64.

He glanced back at me.

"Good luck, Parzival.

You're going to need it."

"What are you going to do?"

I asked.

"During the fight?"

"Sit back and watch, of course!"

he said.

"This looks to be the most epic battle in videogame history."

He grinned at me one last time, then stepped through the door and was gone, leaving me alone in the dimly lit hallway.

I spent a few minutes thinking about everything Morrow had told me.

Then I walked over to my own immersion bay and stepped inside.

It was a small spherical room.

A gleaming haptic chair was suspended on a jointed hydraulic arm attached to the ceiling.

There was no omnidirectional treadmill, because the room itself served that function.

While you were logged in, you could walk or run in any direction and the sphere would rotate around and beneath you, preventing you from ever touching the wall.

It was like being inside a giant hamster ball.

I climbed into the chair and felt it adjust to fit the contours of my body.

A robotic arm extended from the chair and slipped a brand-new Oculance visor onto my face.

It, too, adjusted so that it fit perfectly.

The visor scanned my retinas and the system prompted me to speak my new pass phrase: "Reindeer Flotilla Setec Astronomy."

I took a deep breath as the system logged me in.

I was ready to rock.

My avatar was buffed to the eyeballs and armed to the teeth.

I was packing as many magic items and as much firepower as I could squeeze into my inventory.

Everything was in place.

Our plan was in motion.

It was time to go.

I entered my stronghold's hangar and pressed a button on the wall to open the launch doors.

They slid back, slowly revealing the launch tunnel leading up to Falco's surface.

I walked to the end of the runway, past my X-wing and the Vonnegut.

I wouldn't be taking either of them today.

They were both good ships, with formidable weapons and defenses, but neither craft would offer much protection in the epic shitstorm that was about to unfold on Chthonia.

Fortunately, I now had a new mode of transportation.

I removed the twelve-inch Leopardon robot from my avatar's inventory and set it down gently on the runway.

Shortly before I'd been arrested by IOI, I'd taken some time to examine the toy Leopardon robot and ascertain its powers.

As I suspected, the robot was actually a powerful magical item.

It hadn't taken me long to figure out the command word required to activate it.

Just like in Toei's original Supaidaman TV series, you summoned the robot simply by shouting its name.

I did this now, taking the precaution of backing away from the robot a good distance before shouting "Leopardon!"

I heard a piercing shriek that sounded like rending metal.

A second later, the once-tiny robot had grown to a height of almost a hundred meters.

The top of the robot's head now protruded through the open launch doors in the hangar ceiling.

I gazed up at the towering robot, admiring the attention to detail Halliday had put into coding it.

Every feature of the original Japanese mech had been re- created, including its giant gleaming sword and spiderweb-embossed shield.

A tiny access door was set into the robot's massive left foot, and it opened as I approached, revealing a small elevator inside.

It carried me up through the interior of the robot's leg and torso, to the cockpit located inside its armored chest.

As I seated myself in the captain's chair, I spotted a silver control bracelet in a clear case on the wall.

I took it out and snapped it onto my avatar's wrist.

The bracelet would allow me to use voice commands to control the robot while I was outside it.

Several rows of buttons were set into the command console in front of me, all labeled in Japanese.

I pressed one of them and the engines roared to life.

Then I hit the throttle and the twin rocket boosters in each of the robot's feet ignited, launching it upward, out of my stronghold and into Falco's star-filled sky.

I noticed that Halliday had added an old eight-track tape player to the cockpit control panel.

There was also a rack of eight-track tapes mounted over my right shoulder.

I grabbed one and slapped it into the deck.

Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap by AC/DC began to blast out of the robot's internal and external speakers, so loud it made my chair vibrate.

As soon as the robot was clear of my hangar, I shouted "Change Marveller!"

into the control bracelet (the voice commands appeared to work only if you shouted them).

The robot's legs, arms, and head folded inward and locked into new positions, transforming the robot into a starship known as the Marveller.

Once the transformation was complete, I left Falco's orbit and set a course for the nearest stargate.

When I emerged from the stargate in Sector Ten, my radar screen lit up like a Christmas tree.

Thousands of space vehicles of every make and model were crawling through the starry blackness around me, everything from single-seater craft to giant moon-sized freighters.

I'd never seen so many starships in one place.

A steady stream of them poured out of the stargate, while others converged on the area from every direction in the sky.

All of the ships gradually funneled together, forming a long, haphazard caravan of vessels stretching toward Chthonia, a tiny blue-brown orb floating in the distance.

It looked like every single person in the OASIS was headed for Castle Anorak.

I felt a brief surge of exhilaration, even though I knew Art3mis's warning might still prove true-there was a chance most of these avatars were here only to watch the show and had no intention of actually risking their lives to fight the Sixers.

Art3mis.

After all this time, she was now in a room just a few feet away from me.

We would actually be meeting in person as soon as this fight was over.

The thought should have terrified me, but instead I felt a zen calm wash over me: Whatever was going to happen down on Chthonia, everything I'd risked had already been worth it.

I transformed the Marveller back into its robot configuration, then joined the long parade of spacecraft.

My ship stood out in the vast array of vessels, since it was the only giant robot.

A cloud of smaller ships quickly formed around me, piloted by curious avatars zooming in for a closer look at Leopardon.

I had to mute my comlink because so many different people were trying to hail me, asking who the hell I was and where I'd picked up such a sweet ride.

As the planet Chthonia grew larger in my cockpit window, the density and number of ships around me seemed to increase exponentially.

When I finally entered the planet's atmosphere and began to descend toward the surface, it was like flying through a swarm of metal insects.

When I reached the area around Castle Anorak, I had a hard time believing my eyes.

A concentrated, pulsing mass of ships and avatars covered the ground and filled the air.

It was like some otherworldly Woodstock.

Shoulder-to-shoulder avatars stretched to the horizon in all directions.

Thousands more floated and flew through the air above, dodging the constant influx of ships.

And at the center of all this insanity stood Castle Anorak itself, an onyx jewel gleaming beneath the Sixers' transparent spherical shield.

Every few seconds some hapless avatar or ship would inadvertently fly or careen into the shield and get vaporized, like a fly hitting a bug zapper.

When I got closer, I spotted an open patch of ground directly in front of the castle's entrance, just outside the shield wall.

Three giant figures stood side by side at the center of the clearing.

The crowd around them was continuously surging inward and then receding as avatars pushed back against each other to try to keep a respectful distance from Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto, who each sat inside their own gleaming giant robot.

This was my first opportunity to see which robots Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto had selected after clearing the Second Gate, and it took me a moment to place the towering female robot Art3mis was piloting.

It was black and chrome in color, with elaborate boomerang-shaped headgear and symmetrical red breastplates that made it look like a female version of Tranzor Z.

Then I realized it was the female version of Tranzor Z, an obscure character from the original Mazinger Z anime series known as Minerva X.

Aech had selected an RX-78 Gundam mech from the original Mobile Suit Gundam anime series, one of his longtime favorites.

(Even though I now knew Aech was actually a female in real life, her avatar was still male, so I decided to continue to refer to him as such.) Shoto stood several heads taller than both of them, concealed inside the cockpit of Raideen, the enormous red-and-blue robot from the mid-'70s Brave Raideen anime series.

The massive mech clutched his signature golden bow in one hand and had a large spiked shield strapped to the other.

A roar swept through the crowd as I flew in low over the shield and rocketed to a halt above the others.

I rotated my orientation so that Leopardon was upright, then cut the engines and dropped the remaining distance to the surface.

My robot landed on one knee, and the impact shook the ground.

As I stood it upright, the sea of onlookers began to chant my avatar's name.

Par-zi-val!

Par- zi-val!

As the chanting faded back to a dull roar, I turned to face my companions.

"Nice entrance, ya big show-off,"

Art3mis said, using our private comlink channel.

"Did you show up late on purpose?"

"Not my fault, I swear,"

I said, trying to play it cool.

"There was a long line at the stargate."

Aech nodded his mech's massive head.

"Every transport terminal on the planet has been spitting out avatars since last night,"

he said, motioning to the scene around us with his Gundam's massive hand.

"This is unreal.

I've never seen so many ships or avatars in one place."

"Me neither,"

Art3mis said.

"I'm surprised the GSS servers can handle the load, with so much activity in one sector.

But there doesn't seem to be any lag at all."

I took a long look at the sea of avatars around us, then shifted my attention to the castle.

Thousands of flying avatars and ships continued to buzz around the shield, occasionally firing bullets, lasers, missiles, and other projectiles at it, all of which impacted harmlessly on the surface.

Inside the sphere, thousands of power-armored Sixer avatars stood in silent formation, completely encircling the castle.

Interspersed through their ranks were rows of hover tanks and gunships.

In any other setting, the Sixer army would have appeared formidable.

Maybe even unstoppable.

But in the face of the endless mob that now surrounded them, the Sixers looked woefully outnumbered and outmatched.

"So, Parzival,"

said Shoto, turning his robot's huge head in my direction.

"It's showtime, old friend.

If that sphere doesn't come down like you promised, this is going to be pretty embarrassing."

"

'Han will have that shield down,' "

Aech quoted.

"

'We've got to give him more time!' "

I laughed, then used my robot's right hand to tap the back of its left wrist, indicating the time.

"Aech is right.

It's still six minutes to noon."

The end of my sentence was drowned out by another roar from the crowd.

Directly in front of us, inside the sphere, the massive front doors of Castle Anorak had just swung open, and now a single Sixer avatar was emerging from within.

Sorrento.

Grinning at the din of booing and hissing that greeted his arrival, Sorrento waved his hand at the Sixer troops stationed directly in front of the castle and they immediately scattered, clearing a large open space.

Sorrento stepped forward into it, positioning himself directly opposite us, just a few dozen yards away, on the other side of the shield.

Ten other Sixer avatars emerged from the castle and positioned themselves behind Sorrento, each of them standing a good distance apart.

"I have a bad feeling about this,"

Art3mis muttered into her headset.

"Yeah,"

Aech whispered.

"Me too."

Sorrento surveyed the scene, then smiled up at us.

When he spoke, his voice was amplified through powerful speakers mounted on the Sixer gunships and hover tanks, allowing him to be heard by everyone in the area.

And since there were cameras and reporters from every major newsfeed outlet present, I knew his words were being broadcast to the entire world.

"Welcome to Castle Anorak,"

Sorrento said.

"We've been expecting you."

He made a sweeping gesture, indicating the angry mob that surrounded him.

"I must say, we are a bit surprised so many of you showed up here today.

By now it must be obvious, to even the most ignorant among you, that nothing can get past our shield."

His proclamation was met with a deafening roar of shouted threats, insults, and colorful profanity.

I waited a moment, then raised both of my robot's hands, calling for quiet.

Once a semblance of silence had descended, I got on the public comm channel, which had the same effect as turning on a giant PA system.

I dialed my headset volume down to kill the feedback, then said, "You're wrong, Sorrento.

We're coming in.

At noon.

All of us."

A roar of approval erupted from the assembled gunters.

Sorrento didn't bother waiting for it to die down.

"You're welcome to try,"

he said, still grinning.

Then he produced an item from his inventory and placed it on the ground in front of him.

I zoomed in for a closer look and felt the muscles in my jaw tighten.

It was a toy robot.

A bipedal dinosaur with armor-plated skin and a pair of large cannons mounted on its shoulder blades.

I recognized it immediately, from several turn-of-the-century Japanese monster flicks.

It was Mechagodzilla.

"Kiryu!"

Sorrento shouted, his voice still amplified.

At the sound of the command word, his tiny robot instantly grew in size until it stood almost as tall as Castle Anorak itself, twice the height of the "giant"

robots that Aech, Shoto, Art3mis, and I piloted.

The mechanical lizard's armored head almost touched the top of the spherical shield.

An awestruck silence fell over the crowd, followed by a rumble of fearful recognition from the thousands of gunters present.

They all recognized this giant metal behemoth.

And they all knew it was nearly indestructible.

Sorrento entered the mech through an access door in one of its massive heels.

A few seconds later, the beast's eyes began to glow bright yellow.

Then it threw back its head, opened its jagged maw, and let out a piercing metallic roar.

On cue, the ten Sixer avatars standing behind Sorrento pulled out their toy robots and activated them, too.

Five of them had the huge robotic lions that could form Voltron.

The other five had giant mechs from Robotech and Neon Genesis Evangelion.

"Oh shit,"

I heard Art3mis and Aech whisper in unison.

"Come on!"

Sorrento shouted defiantly.

His challenge echoed across the crowded landscape.

Many of the gunters on the front lines took an involuntary step backward.

A few others turned and ran for their lives.

But Aech, Shoto, Art3mis, and I held our ground.

I checked the time on my display.

Less than a minute to go now.

I pressed a button on Leopardon's control panel, and my giant robot drew its gleaming sword.

I didn't witness it firsthand, but I can tell you with some certainty that this is what happened next: The Sixers had erected a large armored bunker behind Castle Anorak, filled with pallets of weapons and battle gear that had been teleported in by the Sixers before they activated their shield.

There was also a long rack of thirty Supply Droids, which had been installed along the bunker's eastern wall.

Due to a lack of imagination on the part of the Supply Droids' original designer, they all looked exactly like the robot Johnny Five from the 1986 film Short Circuit.

The Sixers used these droids primarily as gofers, to run errands and fill equipment and ammo requisitions for the troops stationed outside.

At exactly one minute to noon, one of the Supply Droids, designation SD-03, powered itself on and disengaged from its charging dock.

Then it rolled forward on its tank treads, across the bunker floor, to the armory cage at its opposite end.

Two robotic sentries stood outside the armory's entrance.

SD-03 transmitted its equipment requisition order to them-an order that I myself had submitted on the Sixer intranet two days earlier.

The sentries verified the requisition and stepped aside, permitting SD-03 to roll into the cage.

It continued past long storage racks that held a wide array of weaponry: magic swords, shields, powered armor suits, plasma rifles, railguns, and countless other weapons.

Finally, the droid rolled to a stop.

The rack in front of it held five large octahedron-shaped devices, each roughly the size of a soccer ball.

Each device had a small control panel set into one of its eight sides, along with a serial number.

SD-03 found the serial number that matched the one on my requisition form.

Then, following a set of instructions I'd programmed into it, the little droid used its clawlike index finger to enter a series of commands on the device's control panel.

When it finished, a small light above the keypad turned from green to red.

Then SD-03 lifted the octahedron in its arms.

As it exited the armory, one antimatter friction-induction bomb was subtracted from the Sixers' computerized inventory.

SD-03 then rolled out of the bunker and began to climb a series of ramps and staircases the Sixers had built onto the castle's outer walls to provide access to the upper levels.

Along the way, the droid rolled through several security checkpoints.

Each time, robotic sentries scanned its security clearance and found that the droid was allowed to go anywhere it damn well pleased.

When SD-03 reached Castle Anorak's uppermost level, it rolled out onto a large observation platform located there.

At this point, SD-03 may have drawn a few curious looks from the squadron of elite Sixer avatars guarding the platform.

I have no way of knowing.

But even if the guards somehow anticipated what was about to happen and opened fire on the little droid, it was too late for them to stop it now.

SD-03 continued rolling directly to the center of the roof, where a high-level Sixer wizard sat holding the Orb of Osuvox-the artifact generating the spherical shield around the castle.

Then, executing the last of the instructions I'd programmed into it two days earlier, SD-03 lifted the antimatter friction-induction bomb up over its head and detonated it.

The explosion vaporized the supply droid, along with all the avatars stationed on the platform, including the Sixer wizard who was operating the Orb of Osuvox.

The moment he died, the artifact deactivated and fell to the now-empty platform.

A brilliant flash of light accompanied the detonation, momentarily blinding me.

When it receded, my eyes focused back on the castle.

The shield was down.

Now, nothing separated the mighty Sixer and gunter armies but open ground and empty space.

For about five seconds, nothing happened.

Time seemed to stop and everything was silent and still.

Then all hell broke loose.

Sitting alone in the cockpit of my mech, I let out a silent cheer.

Incredibly, my plan had worked.

But I had no time to celebrate, because I was now standing smack-dab in the middle of the largest battle in the history of the OASIS.

I don't know what I expected to happen next.

I'd hoped maybe a tenth of the gunters present would join our assault on the Sixers.

But in seconds it was clear that every single one of them intended to join the fight.

A fierce battle cry rose from the sea of avatars around us and they all surged forward, converging on the Sixer army from every direction.

Their total lack of hesitation astounded me, because it was obvious many of them were rushing toward certain death.

I watched in amazement as the two mighty forces clashed all around me, on the ground and in the sky.

It was a chaotic, breathtaking scene, like several beehives and wasp nests had been smashed together and then dropped onto a giant anthill.

Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and I stood at the center of it all.

At first, I didn't even move for fear of crushing the wave of gunters swarming around and over my robot's feet.

Sorrento, however, didn't wait for anyone to get out of his way.

He crushed several dozen avatars (including a few of his own troops) under his mech's titanic feet as he lumbered toward us, each of his footfalls creating a small crater in the rocky surface.

"Uh-oh,"

I heard Shoto mutter as his mech assumed a defensive posture.

"Here he comes."

The Sixer mechs were already taking an immense amount of fire from all directions.

Sorrento was getting hit more than anyone, because his mech was the biggest target on the battlefield, and no gunter with a ranged weapon could seem to resist taking a shot at him.

The intense barrage of projectiles, fireballs, magic missiles, and laser bolts quickly destroyed or disabled the other Sixer mechs (who never even got a chance to form Voltron).

But Sorrento's robot somehow remained undamaged.

Every projectile that hit him seemed to ricochet harmlessly off his mech's armored body.

Dozens of spacecraft swooped and buzzed around him, peppering his mech with rocket fire, but their attacks also seemed to have little effect.

"It is on!"

Aech shouted into his comlink.

"It is on like Red Dawn!"

And with that, he unleashed all of his Gundam's considerable firepower at Sorrento.

At the same moment, Shoto began firing Raideen's bow, while Art3mis's mech fired some sort of red energy beam that appeared to originate from Minerva X's giant metal breasts.

Not wanting to be left out, I fired Leopardon's Arc Turn weapon, a gold boomerang that launched from the mech's forehead.

All of our attacks were direct hits, but Art3mis's beam weapon was the only one that seemed to do any real damage to Sorrento.

She blasted a chunk out of the metal lizard's right shoulder blade and disabled the cannon mounted there.

But Sorrento didn't pause in his approach.

As he continued to close in on us, the Mechagodzilla's eyes began to glow a bright blue.

Then Sorrento opened its mouth, and a cascading bolt of blue lightning shot outward from the mech's open maw.

The beam struck the ground directly in front of us, then cut a deep smoking furrow in the earth as it continued to sweep forward, vaporizing every avatar and ship in its path.

All four of us managed to leap out of the way by launching our robots skyward, though I nearly took a direct hit.

The lightning weapon shut down a second later, but Sorrento continued to trudge forward.

I noticed that his mech's eyes were no longer glowing blue.

Apparently, his lightning weapon had to recharge.

"I think we've reached the final boss,"

Aech joked over the comlink.

The four of us were now spread out and circling above Sorrento, making ourselves moving targets.

"Screw this, guys,"

I said.

"I don't think we can destroy that thing."

"Astute observation, Z,"

Art3mis said.

"Got any bright ideas?"

I thought for a second.

"How about I distract him while the three of you cut around and head for the castle entrance?"

"Sounds like a plan,"

Shoto replied.

But instead of heading for the castle, he banked and flew straight at Sorrento, closing the distance between them in the space of a few seconds.

"Go!"

he shouted into his comlink.

"This bastard is all mine!"

Aech cut across Sorrento's right flank and Art3mis banked left, while I rocketed upward and over him.

Below me, I could see Shoto facing off against Sorrento, and the difference in the size of their mechs was disturbing.

Shoto's robot looked like an action figure next to Sorrento's massive metal dragon.

Nevertheless, Shoto cut his thrusters and dropped to the ground directly in front of the Mechagodzilla.

"Hurry,"

I heard Aech shout.

"The castle entrance is wide open!"

From my vantage point in the sky above, I could see that the Sixer forces surrounding the castle were already being overrun by the endless mob of enemy avatars.

The Sixers' lines were broken, and hundreds of gunters were streaming past them now, running up to the open castle entrance only to discover once they reached it that they couldn't cross the threshold because they didn't possess a copy of the Crystal Key.

Aech swung around directly in front of me.

Still a hundred feet off the ground, he popped the hatch of his Gundam's cockpit and leapt out, whispering the robot's command word in the same instant.

As the giant robot shrank back to its original size, he snatched it out of the air and stowed it in his inventory.

Now flying by some magical means, Aech's avatar swooped down, passed over the bottleneck of gunters clustered at the castle entrance, and disappeared through the open double doors.

A second later, Art3mis executed a similar maneuver, stowing her own mech in midair and then flying into the castle right behind Aech.

I dropped Leopardon into a sharp dive and prepared to follow them.

"Shoto,"

I shouted into my comm.

"We're going inside now!

Let's go!"

"Go ahead,"

Shoto replied.

"I'll be right behind you."

But something about the tone of his voice bothered me, and I pulled out of my dive and swung my mech back around.

Shoto was hovering above Sorrento, near his right flank.

Sorrento slowly turned his mech around and began to stomp back toward the castle.

I could see now that his mech's weakness was its lack of speed.

The Mechagodzilla's slow movement and attacks counterbalanced its seeming invulnerability.

"Shoto!"

I shouted.

"What are you waiting for?

Let's go!"

"Go on without me,"

Shoto said.

"I owe this son of a bitch some payback."

Before I could reply, Shoto dove at Sorrento, swinging a giant sword in each of his mech's hands.

The blades both cut into Sorrento's right side, creating a shower of sparks, and to my surprise, they actually did some damage.

When the smoke cleared I saw that the Mechagodzilla's right arm now hung limp.

It was nearly severed at the elbow.

"Looks like you'll be wiping with your left hand now, Sorrento!"

Shoto shouted triumphantly.

Then he fired Raideen's boosters and headed in my direction, toward the castle.

But Sorrento had already swiveled his mech's head around and was now taking a bead on Shoto with two glowing blue eyes.

"Shoto!"

I shouted.

"Look out!"

But my voice was drowned out by the sound of the lightning weapon firing out of the metal dragon's mouth.

It nailed Shoto's mech directly in the center of its back.

The robot exploded in an orange ball of fire.

I heard a brief screech of static on the comm channel.

I called out Shoto's name again, but he didn't reply.

Then a message flashed on my display, informing me that Shoto's name had just disappeared from the Scoreboard.

He was dead.

This realization momentarily stunned me, which was unfortunate, because Sorrento's lightning weapon was still firing, moving in a fast sweeping arc, cutting across the ground, then diagonally up the castle wall, toward me.

I finally reacted-too late-and Sorrento nailed my mech in the lower torso, just a split second before the beam cut off.

I looked down to discover that the bottom half of my robot had just been blasted away.

Every warning indicator in my cockpit started to flash as my mech began to fall out of the sky in two smoking, burning halves.

Somehow, I had the presence of mind to reach up and yank the ejection handle above my seat.

The cockpit canopy popped off, and I jumped free of the falling mech a split second before it impacted on the castle steps, killing several dozen of the avatars crowded there.

I fired my avatar's jet boots just before I hit the ground, then quickly adjusted my immersion rig's control setup, because I was now controlling my avatar instead of a giant robot.

I managed to land on my feet in front of the castle, just clear of Leopardon's flaming wreckage.

A second after I landed, a shadow spilled over me, and I turned around to see Sorrento's mech blotting out the sky.

He raised its massive left foot, preparing to crush me.

I took three running steps and jumped, firing my jet boots in midleap.

The thrust threw me clear just as the Mechagodzilla's huge clawed foot slammed down, forming a crater in the spot where I'd stood a second before.

The metal beast let out another earsplitting shriek, followed by hollow, booming laughter.

Sorrento's laughter.

I cut my jet-boot thrusters and tucked my avatar into a ball.

I hit the ground rolling, tumbled forward, then came up on my feet.

I squinted up at the metal lizard's head.

Its eyes weren't glowing again-not yet.

I could fire my jet boots again now and make it inside the castle before Sorrento could fire on me again.

He wouldn't be able to follow me inside-not without getting out of his oversize mech.

I could hear Art3mis and Aech shouting at me on my comlink.

They were already inside, standing in front of the gate, waiting for me.

All I had to do was fly into the castle and join them.

The three of us could open and enter the gate before Sorrento caught up with us.

I was sure of it.

But I didn't move.

Instead, I took out the Beta Capsule and held the small metal cylinder in the palm of my avatar's hand.

Sorrento had tried to kill me.

And in the process, he'd murdered my aunt, along with several of my neighbors, including sweet old Mrs.

Gilmore, who had never hurt a soul.

He'd also had Daito killed, and even though I'd never met him, Daito had been my friend.

And now Sorrento had just killed Shoto's avatar, robbing him of his chance to enter the Third Gate.

Sorrento didn't deserve his power or his position.

What he deserved, I decided in that moment, was public humiliation and defeat.

He deserved to have his ass kicked while the whole world watched.

I held the Beta Capsule high over my head and pressed its activation button.

There was a blinding flash of light, and the sky turned crimson as my avatar changed, growing and morphing into a gigantic red-and-silver-skinned humanoid alien with glowing egg-shaped eyes, a strange finned head, and a glowing light embedded in the center of my chest.

For the next three minutes, I was Ultraman.

The Mechagodzilla stopped shrieking and thrashing.

Its gaze had been pointed down at the ground, where my avatar had stood a second earlier.

Now its head slowly tilted up, taking in the size of its new opponent, until our glowing eyes finally met.

I now stood face-to-face with Sorrento's mech, matching its height and size almost exactly.

Sorrento's mech took several awkward steps backward.

Its eyes began to glow again.

I crouched slightly and struck an offensive pose, noticing that a timer now appeared in the corner of my display, counting down from three minutes.

2:59.

2:58.

2:57.

Below the timer there was a menu listing Ultraman's various energy attacks in Japanese.

I quickly selected SPECIUM RAY and then held my arms up in front of me, one horizontal and the other vertical, forming a cross.

A pulsing beam of white energy shot out of my forearms, striking the Mechagodzilla in its chest and knocking it backward.

Thrown off balance, Sorrento lost control and tripped over his own mammoth feet.

His mech tumbled to the ground, landing on its side.

A cheer went up from the thousands of avatars watching from the chaotic battlefield around us.

I launched myself into the air and flew half a kilometer straight upward.

Then I dropped back down, feet first, aiming my heels directly at the Mechagodzilla's curved spine.

When my feet hit, I heard something inside the metal beast snap under my crushing weight.

Smoke began to pour out of its mouth, and the blue glow in its eyes quickly dissipated.

I executed a backflip and landed behind the supine mech in a crouch.

Its single functioning arm flailed wildly while its tail and legs thrashed about.

Sorrento appeared to be struggling with the controls in an effort to get the beast back on its feet.

I selected YATSUAKI KOHRIN from my weapon menu: Ultra-Slice.

A glowing circular saw blade of electric-blue energy appeared in my right hand, spinning fiercely.

I hurled it at Sorrento, releasing it with a snap of my wrist, like a Frisbee.

It whirred through the air and struck the Mechagodzilla in its stomach.

The energy blade cut into its metal skin as if it were tofu, slicing the mech into two halves.

Just before the entire machine exploded, the head detached and blasted away from the neck.

Sorrento had ejected.

But since the mech was lying flat, the head shot out on a trajectory parallel to the ground.

Sorrento quickly adjusted for this, and the rockets sprouting from the head began to tilt it skyward.

Before it could get very far, I crossed my arms again and fired another specium ray, nailing the retreating head like a clay pigeon.

It disintegrated in an immensely satisfying explosion.

The crowd went wild.

I checked the Scoreboard and confirmed that Sorrento's employee number had vanished.

His avatar was dead.

I couldn't take too much satisfaction from this, though, because I knew he was probably already kicking one of his underlings out of a haptic chair so he could take control of a new avatar.

The counter on my display had only fifteen seconds remaining when I deactivated the Beta Capsule.

My avatar instantly shrank back to normal size, and my appearance returned to normal.

Then I spun around, powered on my jet boots, and flew into the castle.

When I reached the opposite end of the huge foyer, I found Aech and Art3mis standing in front of the crystal door, waiting for me.

The smoking, bloodied bodies of over a dozen recently slain Sixer avatars lay scattered on the stone floor around them, slowly fading out of existence.

Apparently, there had been a brief and decisive skirmish and I'd just missed it.

"No fair,"

I said, cutting my jet boots and dropping to the floor beside Aech.

"You could have saved at least one of them for me."

Art3mis didn't reply.

She just gave me the finger.

"Congrats on wasting Sorrento,"

Aech said.

"It was an epic throwdown, for sure.

But you're still a complete idiot.

You know that, right?"

"Yeah."

I shrugged.

"I know."

"You're such a selfish asshole!"

Art3mis shouted.

"What if you'd gotten yourself killed too?"

"I didn't, though.

Did I?"

I said, stepping around her to examine the crystal door.

"So chill out and let's open this thing."

I examined the keyhole in the center of the door, then looked at the words printed directly above it, etched into the door's faceted surface.

Charity.

Hope.

Faith.

I took out my copy of the Crystal Key and held it up.

Aech and Art3mis followed suit and held up their keys too.

Nothing happened.

We all exchanged concerned looks.

Then an idea occurred to me, and I cleared my throat.

"

'Three is a magic number,' "

I said, reciting the first line of the Schoolhouse Rock!

song.

As soon as I spoke the words, the crystal door began to glow, and two additional keyholes appeared, on either side of the first.

"That did it!"

Aech whispered.

"Holy shit.

I can't believe this.

We're really here.

Standing in front of the Third Gate."

Art3mis nodded.

"Finally."

I inserted my key in the center keyhole.

Aech inserted his into the keyhole on the left, and Art3mis placed hers in the keyhole on the right.

"Clockwise?"

Art3mis said.

"On the count of three?"

Aech and I nodded.

Art3mis counted to three, and we turned our keys in unison.

There was a brief flash of blue light, during which all of our keys and the crystal door itself vanished.

And then the Third Gate stood open in front of us, a crystal doorway leading into a spinning whirlpool of stars.

"Wow,"

I heard Art3mis whisper beside me.

"Here we go."

As the three of us stepped forward, preparing to enter the gate, I heard an earsplitting boom.

It sounded like the entire universe was cracking in half.

And then we all died.

When your avatar gets killed, your screen doesn't fade to black right away.

Instead, your point of view automatically shifts to a third-person perspective, treating you to a brief out-of-body replay of your avatar's final fate.

A split second after we heard the thunderous boom, my perspective shifted, and I found myself looking at our three avatars, standing there frozen in front of the open gate.

Then an incinerating white light filled the world, accompanied by an earsplitting wall of sound.

It was what I'd always pictured being fried in a nuclear blast would be like.

For a brief moment, I saw our avatars' skeletons suspended inside the transparent outlines of our motionless bodies.

Then my avatar's hit-point counter dropped to zero.

The blast wave arrived a second later, disintegrating everything in its path- our avatars, the floor, the walls, the castle itself, and the thousands of avatars gathered around it.

Everything was turned to a fine, atomized dust that hung suspended in the air for a second before slowly settling to earth.

The entire surface of the planet had been wiped clean.

The area around Castle Anorak, which had been crowded with warring avatars a split second before, was now a desolate and barren wasteland.

Everyone and everything had been destroyed.

Only the Third Gate remained, a crystal doorway floating in the air above the crater where the castle had stood a moment before.

My initial shock quickly turned to dread as I realized what had just happened.

The Sixers had detonated the Cataclyst.

It was the only explanation.

Only that incredibly powerful artifact could have done this.

Not only had it killed every avatar in the sector, it had even destroyed Castle Anorak, a fortress that, until now, had proven itself to be indestructible.

I stared at the open gate, floating in the empty air, and waited for the inevitable, final message to appear in the center of my display, the words I knew every other avatar in the sector must be seeing at this very moment: GAME OVER.

But when words finally did appear on my display, it was another message entirely: CONGRATULATIONS!

YOU HAVE AN EXTRA LIFE!

Then, as I watched in amazement, my avatar reappeared, fading back into existence in the exact same location where I'd died a few seconds earlier.

I was standing in front of the open gate again.

But the gate was now floating in midair, suspended several dozen meters above the planet's surface, over the crater that had been created by the destruction of the castle.

As my avatar finished materializing, I looked down and realized that the floor I'd been standing on earlier was now gone.

So were my jet boots, and everything else I'd been carrying.

I seemed to hover in midair for a moment, like Wile E.

Coyote in the old Roadrunner cartoons.

Then I plummeted straight down.

I made a desperate grab for the open gate in front of me, but it was well out of reach.

I hit the ground hard and lost a third of my hit points from the impact.

Then I slowly got to my feet and looked around.

I was standing in a vast cube-shaped crater-the space where the foundation and lower basement levels of Castle Anorak had stood.

It was completely barren and eerily silent.

There was no rubble from the destroyed castle, and no wreckage from the thousands of spaceships and aircraft that had filled the sky a few moments ago.

In fact, there was no sign at all of the grand battle that had just been fought here.

The Cataclyst had vaporized everything.

I looked down at my avatar and saw that I was now wearing a black T-shirt and blue jeans, the default outfit that appeared on every newly created avatar.

Then I pulled up my stats and item inventory.

My avatar had the same level and ability scores I'd had previously, but my inventory was completely empty except for one item-the quarter I'd obtained after playing my perfect game of Pac- Man on Archaide.

Once I'd placed the quarter in my inventory, I hadn't been able to remove it, so I'd never been able to have any divination or identification spells cast on it.

I'd had no way of ascertaining the quarter's true purpose or powers.

During the tumultuous events of the past few months, I'd forgotten I even had the damn thing.

But now I knew what the quarter was-a single-use artifact that gave my avatar an extra life.

Until that moment, I hadn't even known such a thing was possible.

In the history of the OASIS, there was no record of any avatar ever acquiring an extra life.

I selected the quarter in my inventory and tried again to remove it.

This time, I was able to take it out and hold it in the palm of my avatar's hand.

Now that the artifact's sole power had been used, it no longer possessed any magical properties.

Now it was just a quarter.

I looked straight up at the crystal gate floating twenty meters above me.

It was still sitting there, wide open.

But I had no idea how I was going to get up there to enter it.

I had no jet boots, no ship, and no magic items or memorized spells.

Nothing that would allow me to fly or levitate.

And there wasn't a single stepladder in sight.

There I was, standing a stone's throw from the Third Gate, but unable to reach it.

"Hey, Z?"

I heard a voice say.

"Can you hear me?"

It was Aech, but her voice was no longer altered to sound male.

I could hear her perfectly, as if she were talking to me via comlink.

But that didn't make sense, because my avatar no longer had a comlink.

And Aech's avatar was dead.

"Where are you?"

I asked the empty air.

"I'm dead, like everyone else,"

Aech said.

"Everyone but you."

"Then how can I hear you?"

"Og patched all of us into your audio and video feeds,"

she said.

"So we can see what you see and hear what you hear."

"Oh,"

I said.

"Is that all right with you, Parzival?"

I heard Og ask.

"If it isn't, just say so."

I thought about it for a moment.

"No, it's fine with me,"

I said.

"Shoto and Art3mis are listening in too?"

"Yes,"

Shoto said.

"I'm here."

"Yeah, we're here, all right,"

Art3mis said, and I could hear the barely contained rage in her voice.

"And we're all dead as doornails.

The question is, why aren't you dead too, Parzival?"

"Yeah, Z,"

Aech said.

"We are a bit curious about that.

What happened?"

I took out the quarter and held it up in front of my eyes.

"I was awarded this quarter on Archaide a few months ago, for playing a perfect game of Pac-Man.

It was an artifact, but I never knew its purpose.

Not until now.

Turns out it gave me an extra life."

I heard only silence for a moment; then Aech began to laugh.

"You lucky son of a bitch!"

she said.

"The newsfeeds are reporting that every single avatar in the sector was just killed.

Over half the population of the OASIS."

"Was it the Cataclyst?"

I asked.

"It had to be,"

Art3mis said.

"The Sixers must have bought it when it went up for auction a few years ago.

And they've been sitting on it all this time, waiting for the perfect moment to detonate it."

"But they just killed off all of their own troops, too,"

Shoto said.

"Why would they do that?"

"I think most of them were already dead,"

Art3mis said.

"The Sixers had no choice,"

I said.

"It was the only way they could stop us.

We'd already opened the Third Gate and were about to step inside when they detonated that thing-"

I paused, realizing something.

"How did they know we'd opened it?

Unless-"

"They were watching us,"

Aech said.

"The Sixers probably had remote surveillance cameras hidden all around the gate."

"So they saw us open it,"

Art3mis said.

"Which means they know how to open it now too."

"Who cares?"

Shoto interjected.

"Sorrento's avatar is dead.

And so are all of the other Sixers."

"Wrong,"

Art3mis said.

"Check the Scoreboard.

There are still twenty Sixer avatars listed there, below Parzival.

And their scores indicate that every single one of them has a copy of the Crystal Key."

"Shit!"

Aech and Shoto said in unison.

"The Sixers knew they might have to detonate the Cataclyst,"

I said.

"So they must have taken the precaution of moving some of their avatars outside of Sector Ten.

They were probably waiting in a gunship just across the sector border, where it was safe."

"You're right,"

Aech said.

"Which means there are twenty more Sixers headed your way right now, Z.

So you need to get your ass moving and get inside that gate.

This is probably going to be your only chance to clear it."

I heard her let out a defeated sigh.

"It's over for us.

So we're all rooting for you now, amigo.

Good luck."

"Thanks, Aech."

"Gokouun o inorimasu,"

Shoto said.

"Do your best."

"I will,"

I said.

Then I waited for Art3mis to give me her blessing too.

"Good luck, Parzival,"

she said after a long pause.

"Aech is right, you know.

You're never going to get another shot at this.

And neither will any other gunter."

I heard her voice catch, as if she were choking back tears.

Then she took a deep breath and said, "Don't screw this up."

"I won't,"

I said.

"No pressure, right?"

I glanced back up at the open gate, suspended in the air above me, so far out of reach.

Then I dropped my gaze and began to scan the area, desperately trying to figure out how I was going to get up there.

Something caught my eye-just a few flickering pixels in the distance, near the opposite end of the crater.

I ran toward them.

"Uh, not to be a backseat driver or anything,"

Aech said.

"But where the hell are you going?"

"All of my avatar's items were destroyed by the Cataclyst,"

I said.

"So now I have no way to fly up there and reach the gate."

"You've got to be kidding me!"

Aech sighed.

"Man, the hits just keep on coming!"

As I approached the object in the distance, it became gradually clearer.

It was the Beta Capsule, floating just a few centimeters above the ground, spinning clockwise.

The Cataclyst had destroyed everything in the sector that could be destroyed, but artifacts were indestructible.

Just like the gate.

"It's the Beta Capsule!"

Shoto shouted.

"It must have been thrown over here by the force of the blast.

You can use it to become Ultraman and fly up to the gate!"

I nodded, raised the capsule over my head, then pressed the button on the side to activate it.

But nothing happened.

"Shit!"

I muttered, realizing why.

"It won't work.

It can only be used once a day."

I stowed the Beta Capsule and started to scan the ground around me.

"There must be other artifacts scattered around here,"

I said.

I began to run along the perimeter of the castle foundation, still scanning the ground.

"Were any of you guys carrying artifacts?

One that would give me the ability to fly?

Or levitate?

Or teleport?"

"No,"

answered Shoto.

"I didn't have any artifacts."

"My Sword of the Ba'Heer was an artifact,"

Aech said.

"But it won't help you reach the gate."

"But my Chucks will,"

Art3mis said.

"Your 'Chucks'?"

I repeated.

"My shoes.

Black Chuck Taylor All Stars.

They bestow their wearer with both speed and flight."

"Great!

Perfect!"

I said.

"Now I just have to find them."

I continued to run forward, eyes sweeping the ground.

I found Aech's sword a minute later and added it to my inventory, but it took me another five minutes of searching before I found Art3mis's magic sneakers, near the south end of the crater.

I put them on, and they adjusted to fit my avatar's feet perfectly.

"I'll get these back to you, Arty,"

I said, just as I finished lacing them up.

"Promise."

"You better,"

she said.

"They were my favorites."

I took three running steps, leapt into the air, and then I was flying.

I swooped up and around, then turned back toward the gate, aiming straight for it.

But at the last moment, I banked to the right, then arced back around.

I stopped to hover in front of the open gate.

The crystal doorway hung in the air directly ahead, just a few yards away.

It reminded me of the floating door in the opening credits of the original Twilight Zone.

"What are you waiting for?"

Aech shouted.

"The Sixers could show up any minute now!"

"I know,"

I said.

"But there's something I need to say to all of you before I go in."

"Well?"

Art3mis said.

"Spit it out!

The clock is ticking, fool!"

"OK, OK!"

I said.

"I just wanted to say that I know how the three of you must feel right now.

It isn't fair, the way this has played out.

We should all be entering the gate together.

So before I go in, I want you guys to know something.

If I reach the egg, I'm going to split the prize money equally among the four of us."

Stunned silence.

"Hello?"

I said after a few seconds.

"Did you guys hear me?"

"Are you insane?"

Aech asked.

"Why would you do that, Z?"

"Because it's the only honorable thing to do,"

I said.

"Because I never would have gotten this far on my own.

Because all four of us deserve to see what's inside that gate and find out how the game ends.

And because I need your help."

"Could you repeat that last bit, please?"

Art3mis asked.

"I need your help,"

I said.

"You guys are right.

This is my only shot at clearing the Third Gate.

There won't be any second chances, for anyone.

The Sixers will be here soon, and they'll enter the gate as soon as they arrive.

So I have to clear it before they do, on my first attempt.

The odds of me pulling that off will increase drastically if the three of you are backing me up.

So ...

what do you say?"

"Count me in, Z,"

Aech said.

"I was planning to coach your dumb ass anyway."

"Count me in too,"

said Shoto.

"I've got nothing left to lose."

"Let me get this straight,"

Art3mis said.

"We help you clear the gate, and in return, you agree to split the prize money with us?"

"Wrong,"

I said.

"If I win, I'm going to split the prize money with you guys, regardless of whether you help me or not.

So helping me is probably in your best interest."

"I don't suppose we have time to get that in writing?"

Art3mis said.

I thought for a moment, then accessed my POV channel's control menu.

I initiated a live broadcast, so everyone watching my channel (my ratings counter said I currently had more than two hundred million viewers) could hear what I was about to say.

"Greetings,"

I said.

"This is Wade Watts, also known as Parzival.

I want to let the whole world know that if and when I find Halliday's Easter egg, I hereby vow to split my winnings equally with Art3mis, Aech, and Shoto.

Cross my heart and hope to die.

Gunter's honor.

Pinky swear.

All of that crap.

If I'm lying, I should be forever branded as a gutless Sixer-fellating punk."

As I finished the broadcast, I heard Art3mis say, "Dude, are you nuts?

I was kidding!"

"Oh,"

I said.

"Right.

I knew that."

I cracked my knuckles, then flew forward into the gate, and my avatar vanished into the whirlpool of stars.

I found myself standing in a vast, dark, empty space.

I couldn't see the walls or ceiling, but there appeared to be a floor, because I was standing on something.

I waited a few seconds, unsure of what to do.

Then a booming electronic voice echoed through the void.

It sounded as if it were being generated by a primitive speech synthesizer, like those used in Q*Bert and Gorf.

"Beat the high score or be destroyed!"

the voice announced.

A shaft of light appeared, shining down from somewhere high above.

There, in front of me, at the base of this long pillar of light, stood an old coin-operated arcade game.

I recognized its distinctive, angular cabinet immediately.

Tempest.

Atari.

1980.

I closed my eyes and dropped my head.

"Crap,"

I muttered.

"This is not my best game, gang."

"Come on,"

I heard Art3mis whisper.

"You had to know Tempest was going to factor into the Third Gate somehow.

It was so obvious!"

"Oh really?"

I said.

"Why?"

"Because of the quote on the last page of the Almanac,"

she replied.

"

'I must uneasy make, lest too light winning make the prize light.' "

"I know the quote,"

I said, annoyed.

"It's from Shakespeare.

But I figured it was just Halliday's way of letting us know how difficult he was going to make the Hunt."

"It was,"

Art3mis said.

"But it was also a clue.

That quote was taken from Shakespeare's final play, The Tempest."

"Shit!"

I hissed.

"How the hell did I miss that?"

"I never made that connection either,"

Aech confessed.

"Bravo, Art3mis."

"The game Tempest also appears briefly in the music video for the song 'Subdivisions' by Rush,"

she added.

"One of Halliday's favorites.

Pretty hard to miss."

"Whoa,"

Shoto said.

"She's good."

"OK!"

I shouted.

"It should have been obvious.

No need to rub it in!"

"I take it you've haven't had much practice at this game, Z?"

Aech said.

"A little, a long time ago,"

I said.

"But not nearly enough.

Look at the high score."

I pointed at the monitor.

The high score was 728,329.

The initials next to it were JDH-James Donovan Halliday.

And, as I feared, the credit counter at the bottom of the screen had a numeral one in front of it.

"Yikes,"

Aech said.

"Only one credit.

Just like Black Tiger."

I remembered the now-useless extra life quarter in my inventory and took it out.

But when I dropped it into the coin slot, it fell right through into the coin return.

I reached down to remove it and saw a sticker on the coin mechanism: TOKENS ONLY.

"So much for that idea,"

I said.

"And I don't see a token machine anywhere around here."

"Looks like you only get one game,"

Aech said.

"All or nothing."

"Guys, I haven't played Tempest in years,"

I said.

"I'm screwed.

There's no way I'm going to beat Halliday's high score on my first attempt."

I glanced at the bottom of the screen: MCMLXXX ATARI.

"Nineteen eighty?"

Aech said.

"How does that help him?"

"Yeah,"

I said.

"How does that help me?"

"That means this is the very first version of Tempest,"

Art3mis said.

"The version that shipped with a bug in the game code.

When Tempest first hit the arcades, kids discovered that if you died with a certain score, the machine would give you a bunch of free credits."

"Oh,"

I said, somewhat ashamed.

"I didn't know that."

"You would,"

Art3mis said, "if you'd researched the game as much as I did."

"Damn, girl,"

Aech said.

"You've got some serious knowledge."

"Thanks,"

she said.

"It helps to be an obsessive-compulsive geek.

With no life."

Everyone laughed at that, except me.

I was much too nervous.

"OK, Arty,"

I said.

"What do I need to do to get those free games?"

"I'm looking it up in my quest journal right now,"

she said.

I could hear paper rustling.

It sounded like she was flipping through the pages of an actual book.

"You just happen to have a hard copy of your journal with you?"

I asked.

"I've always kept my journal longhand, in spiral notebooks,"

she said.

"Good thing, too, since my OASIS account and everything in it was just erased."

More flipping of pages.

"Here it is!

First, you need to rack up over one hundred eighty thousand points.

Once you've done that, make sure you end the game with a score where the last two digits are oh six, eleven, or twelve.

If you do that, you'll get forty free credits."

"You're absolutely positive?"

"Positively absolutely."

"OK,"

I said.

"Here goes."

I began to run through my pregame ritual.

Stretching, cracking my knuckles, rolling my head and neck left and right.

"Christ, will you get on with it?"

Aech said.

"The suspense is killing me here!"

"Quiet!"

Shoto said.

"Give the man some room to breathe, will you?"

Everyone remained silent while I finished psyching myself up.

"Here goes nothing,"

I said.

Then I hit the flashing Player One button.

Tempest used old-school vector graphics, so the game's images were created from glowing neon lines drawn against a pitch-black screen.

You're given a top- down view of a three-dimensional tunnel, and you use a spinning rotary dial to control a "shooter"

that travels around the rim of the tunnel.

The object of the game is to shoot the enemies crawling up out of the tunnel toward you while dodging their fire and avoiding other obstacles.

As you proceed from one level to the next, the tunnels take on gradually more complex geometric shapes, and the number of enemies and obstacles crawling up toward you multiplies drastically.

Halliday had put this Tempest machine on Tournament settings, so I couldn't start the game any higher than level nine.

It took me about fifteen minutes to get my score up above 180,000, and I lost two lives in the process.

I was even rustier than I thought.

When my score hit 189,412, I intentionally impaled my shooter on a spike, using up my last remaining life.

The game prompted me to enter my initials, and I nervously tapped them in: W-O-W.

When I finished, the game's credit counter jumped from zero up to forty.

The sound of my friends' wild cheers filled my ears, nearly giving me a heart attack.

"Art3mis, you're a genius,"

I said, once the noise died down.

"I know."

I tapped the Player One button again and began a second game, now focused on beating Halliday's high score.

I still felt anxious, but considerably less so.

If I didn't manage to get the high score this time, I had thirty-nine more chances.

During a break between waves, Art3mis spoke up.

"So, your initials are W-O- W?

What does the O stand for?"

"Obtuse,"

I said.

She laughed.

"No, seriously."

"Owen."

"Owen,"

she repeated.

"Wade Owen Watts.

That's nice."

Then she fell silent again as the next wave began.

I finished my second game a few minutes later, with a score of 219,584.

Not horrible, but a far cry from my goal.

"Not bad,"

Aech said.

"Yeah, but not that good, either,"

Shoto observed.

Then he seemed to remember that I could hear him.

"I mean-much better, Parzival.

You're doing great."

"Thanks for the vote of confidence, Shoto."

"Hey, check this out,"

Art3mis said, reading from her journal.

"The creator of Tempest, Dave Theurer, originally got the idea for the game from a nightmare he had about monsters crawling up out of a hole in the ground and chasing after him."

She laughed her little musical laugh, which I hadn't heard in so long.

"Isn't that cool, Z?"

she said.

"That is cool,"

I replied.

Somehow, just hearing her voice set me at ease.

I think she knew this, and that was why she kept talking to me.

I felt reenergized.

I hit the Player One button again and began my third game.

They all watched me play in complete silence.

Nearly an hour later, I lost my last man.

My final score was 437,977.

As soon as the game ended, Aech's voice cut in.

"Bad news, amigo,"

she said.

"What?"

"We were right.

When the Cataclyst went off, the Sixers had a group of avatars in reserve, waiting just outside the sector.

Right after the detonation, they reentered the sector and headed straight for Chthonia.

They ..."

Her voice trailed off.

"They what?"

"They just entered the gate, about five minutes ago,"

Art3mis answered.

"The gate closed after you went in, but when the Sixers arrived, they used three of their own keys to reopen it."

"You mean the Sixers are already inside the gate?

Right now?"

"Eighteen of them,"

Aech said.

"When they stepped through the gate, each one entered a stand-alone simulation.

A separate instance of the gate.

All eighteen of them are playing Tempest right now, just like you.

Trying to beat Halliday's high score.

And all of them used the exploit to get forty free credits.

Most of them aren't doing that well, but one of them has some serious skill.

We think Sorrento is probably operating that avatar.

He just started his second game -"

"Wait a second!"

I interrupted.

"How can you possibly know all this?"

"Because we can see them,"

Shoto said.

"Everyone logged into the OASIS right now can see them.

They can see you, too."

"What the hell are you talking about?"

"The moment someone enters the Third Gate, a live vidfeed of their avatar appears at the top of the Scoreboard,"

Art3mis said.

"Apparently, Halliday wanted clearing the final gate to be a spectator sport."

"Wait,"

I said.

"You mean to tell me that the entire world has been watching me play Tempest for the past hour?"

"Correct,"

Art3mis said.

"And they're watching you stand there and jabber back at us right now too.

So watch what you say."

"Why didn't you guys tell me?"

I shouted.

"We didn't want to make you nervous,"

Aech said.

"Or distract you."

"Oh, great!

Perfect!

Thank you!"

I was shouting, somewhat hysterically.

"Calm down, Parzival,"

Art3mis said.

"Get your head back in the game.

This a race now.

There are eighteen Sixer avatars right behind you.

So you need to make this next game count.

Understand?"

"Yeah,"

I said, exhaling slowly.

"I understand."

I took another deep breath and pressed the Player One button once again.

As usual, competition brought out the best in me.

This time, I managed to slip into the zone.

Spinner, zapper, super-zapper, clear a level, avoid the spikes.

My hands began to work the controls without my even having to think about it.

I forgot about what was at stake, and I forgot about the millions of people watching me.

I lost myself in the game.

I'd been playing just over an hour and had just cleared level 81 when I heard another wild burst of cheering in my ears.

"You did it, man!"

I heard Shoto shout.

My eyes darted up to the top of the screen.

My score was 802,488.

I kept playing, instinctively wanting to get the highest score possible.

But then I heard Art3mis loudly clear her throat, and I realized there was no need to go any further.

In fact, I was now wasting valuable seconds, burning away whatever lead I still had on the Sixers.

I quickly depleted my two extra lives, and GAME OVER flashed on the screen.

I entered my initials again, and they appeared at the top of the list, just above Halliday's high score.

Then the monitor went blank, and a message appeared in the center of the screen: WELL DONE, PARZIVAL!

PREPARE FOR STAGE 2!

Then the game cabinet vanished, and my avatar vanished with it.

I found myself galloping across a fog-covered hillside.

I assumed I was riding a horse, because I was bobbing up and down and I heard the sound of hoofbeats.

Directly ahead, a familiar-looking castle had just appeared out of the fog.

But when I looked down at my avatar's body, I saw that I wasn't riding a horse at all.

I was walking on the ground.

My avatar was now dressed in a suit of chain-mail armor, and my hands were held out in front of my body, as though I were clutching a set of reins.

But I wasn't holding anything.

My hands were completely empty.

I stopped moving forward and the sound of hoofbeats also ceased, but not until a few seconds later.

I turned around and saw the source of the sound.

It wasn't a horse.

It was a man banging two coconut halves together.

Then I knew where I was.

Inside the first scene of Monty Python and the Holy Grail.

Another of Halliday's favorite films, and perhaps the most-beloved geek film of all time.

It appeared to be another Flicksync, like the WarGames simulation inside Gate One.

I was playing King Arthur, I realized.

I wore the same costume Graham Chapman had worn in the film.

And the man with the coconuts was my trusty manservant, Patsy, as played by Terry Gilliam.

Patsy bowed and groveled a bit when I turned to face him, but said nothing.

"It's Python's Holy Grail!"

I heard Shoto whisper excitedly.

"Duh,"

I said, forgetting myself for a second.

"I know that, Shoto."

A warning flashed on my display: INCORRECT DIALOGUE!

A score of 100 points appeared in the corner of my display.

"Smooth move, Ex-lax,"

I heard Art3mis say.

"Just let us know if you need any help, Z,"

Aech said.

"Wave your hands or something, and we'll feed you the next line."

I nodded and gave a thumbs-up.

But I didn't think I was going to need much help.

Over the past six years, I'd watched Holy Grail exactly 157 times.

I knew every word by heart.

I glanced back up at the castle ahead of me, already aware of what was waiting for me there.

I began to "gallop"

again, holding my invisible reins as I pretended to ride forward.

Once again, Patsy began to bang his coconut halves together, galloping along behind me.

When we reached the entrance of the castle, I pulled back on my "reins"

and brought my "steed"

to a halt.

"Whoa there!"

I shouted.

My score increased by 100 points, bringing it back up to zero.

On cue, two soldiers appeared up above, leaning over the castle wall.

"Who goes there?"

one of them shouted down at us.

"It is I, Arthur, son of Uther Pendragon, from the castle of Camelot,"

I recited.

"King of the Britons!

Defeater of the Saxons!

Sovereign of all England!"

My score jumped another 500 points, and a message informed me that I'd received a bonus for my accent and inflection.

I felt myself relax, and I realized I was already having fun.

"Pull the other one!"

the soldier replied.

"I am,"

I continued.

"And this is my trusty servant Patsy.

We have ridden the length and breadth of the land in search of knights who will join me in my court at Camelot.

I must speak with your lord and master!"

Another 500 points.

In my ear, I could hear my friends giggling and applauding.

"What?"

the other soldier replied.

"Ridden on a horse?"

"Yes!"

I said.

100 points.

"You're using coconuts!"

"What?"

I said.

100 points.

"You've got two empty halves of coconut and you're bangin' 'em together!"

"So?

We have ridden since the snows of winter covered this land, through the kingdom of Mercia, through-"

Another 500 points.

"Where'd you get the coconuts?"

And so it went.

The character I was playing changed from one scene to the next, switching to whomever had the most dialogue.

Incredibly, I flubbed only six or seven lines.

Each time I got stumped, all I had to do was shrug and hold out my hands, palms up-my signal that I needed some help-and Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto would all gleefully feed me the correct line.

The rest of the time they remained silent except for the occasional giggle fit or burst of laughter.

The only really difficult part was not laughing myself, especially when Art3mis started doing note-perfect recitations of all of Carol Cleveland's lines in the Castle Anthrax scene.

I cracked up a few times and got hit with score penalties for it.

Otherwise, it was smooth sailing.

Reenacting the film wasn't just easy-it was a total blast.

About halfway through the movie, right after my confrontation with the Knights of Ni, I opened up a text window on my display and typed STATUS ON THE SIXERS?

"Fifteen of them are still playing Tempest,"

I heard Aech reply.

"But three of them beat Halliday's score and are now inside the Grail simulation."

A brief pause.

"And the leader-Sorrento, we think-is running just nine minutes behind you."

"And so far, he hasn't missed a single line of dialogue,"

Shoto added.

I nearly cursed out loud, then caught myself and typed SHIT!

"Exactly,"

Art3mis said.

I took a deep breath and returned my attention to the next scene ("The Tale of Sir Launcelot").

Aech continued to give me updates on the Sixers whenever I asked for them.

When I reached the film's final scene (the assault on the French Castle), I grew anxious again, wondering what would happen next.

The First Gate had required me to reenact a movie (WarGames), and the Second Gate had contained a videogame challenge (Black Tiger).

So far, the Third Gate had contained both.

I knew there must be a third stage, but I had no idea what it might be.

I got my answer a few minutes later.

As soon as I completed Holy Grail's final scene, my display went black while the silly organ music that ends the film played for a few minutes.

When the music stopped, the following appeared on my display: CONGRATULATIONS!

YOU HAVE REACHED THE END!

READY PLAYER 1 And then, as the text faded away, I found myself standing in a huge oak- paneled room as big as a warehouse, with a high vaulted ceiling and a polished hardwood floor.

The room had no windows, and only one exit-large double doors set into one of the four bare walls.

An older high-end OASIS immersion rig stood in the absolute center of the expansive room.

Over a hundred glass tables surrounded the rig, arranged in a large oval around it.

On each table there was a different classic home computer or videogame system, accompanied by tiered racks that appeared to hold a complete collection of its peripherals, controllers, software, and games.

All of it was arranged perfectly, like a museum exhibit.

Looking around the circle, from one system to the next, I saw that the computers seemed to be arranged roughly by year of origin.

A PDP-1.

An Altair 8800.

An IMSAI 8080.

An Apple I, right next to an Apple II.

An Atari 2600.

A Commodore PET.

An Intellivision.

Several different TRS-80 models.

An Atari 400 and 800.

A ColecoVision.

A TI-99/4.

A Sinclair ZX80.

A Commodore 64.

Various Nintendo and Sega game systems.

The entire lineage of Macs and PCs, PlayStations and Xboxes.

Finally, completing the circle, was an OASIS console -connected to the immersion rig in the center of the room.

I realized that I was standing in a re-creation of James Halliday's office, the room in his mansion where he'd spent most of the last fifteen years of his life.

The place where he'd coded his last and greatest game.

The one I was now playing.

I'd never seen any photos of this room, but its layout and contents had been described in great detail by the movers hired to clear the place out after Halliday's death.

I looked down at my avatar and saw that I no longer appeared as one of the Monty Python knights.

I was Parzival once again.

First, I did the obvious and tried the exit.

The doors wouldn't budge.

I turned back and took another long look around the room, surveying the long line of monuments to the history of computing and videogames.

That was when I realized that the oval-shaped ring in which they were arranged actually formed the outline of an egg.

In my head, I recited the words of Halliday's first riddle, the one in Anorak's Invitation: Three hidden keys open three secret gates Wherein the errant will be tested for worthy traits And those with the skill to survive these straits Will reach The End where the prize awaits I'd reached the end.

This was it.

Halliday's Easter egg must be hidden somewhere in this room.

"Do you guys see this?"

I whispered.

There was no reply.

"Hello?

Aech?

Art3mis?

Shoto?

Are you guys still there?"

Still no reply.

Either Og had cut their voice links to me, or Halliday had coded this final stage of the gate so that no outside communication was possible.

I was pretty sure it was the latter.

I stood there in silence for a minute, unsure of what to do.

Then I followed my first instinct and walked over to the Atari 2600.

It was hooked up to a 1977 Zenith Color TV.

I turned on the TV, but nothing happened.

Then I switched on the Atari.

Still nothing.

There was no power, even though both the TV and the Atari were plugged into electrical outlets set into the floor.

I tried the Apple II on the table beside it.

It wouldn't switch on either.

After a few minutes of experimentation, I discovered that the only computer that would power on was one of the oldest, the IMSAI 8080, the same model of computer Matthew Broderick owned in WarGames.

When I booted it up, the screen was completely blank, save for one word.

LOGIN: I typed in ANORAK and hit Enter.

IDENTIFICATION NOT RECOGNIZED-CONNECTION TERMINATED.

Then the computer shut itself off and I had to power it back on to get the LOGIN prompt again.

I tried HALLIDAY.

No dice.

In WarGames, the backdoor password that had granted access to the WOPR supercomputer was "Joshua."

Professor Falken, the creator of the WOPR, had used the name of his son for the password.

The person he'd loved most in the world.

I typed in OG.

It didn't work.

OGDEN didn't work either.

I typed in KIRA and hit the Enter key.

IDENTIFICATION NOT RECOGNIZED-CONNECTION TERMINATED.

I tried each of his parents' first names.

I tried ZAPHOD, the name of his pet fish.

Then TIBERIUS, the name of a ferret he'd once owned.

None of them worked.

I checked the time.

I'd been in this room for over ten minutes now.

Which meant that Sorrento had caught up with me.

So he would now be inside his own separate copy of this room, probably with a team of Halliday scholars whispering suggestions in his ear, thanks to his hacked immersion rig.

They were probably already working from a prioritized list of possibilities, entering them as fast as Sorrento could type.

I was out of time.

I clenched my teeth in frustration.

I had no idea what to try next.

Then I remembered a line from Ogden Morrow's biography: The opposite sex made Jim extremely nervous, and Kira was the only girl that I ever saw him speak to in a relaxed manner.

But even then, it was only in-character, as Anorak, during the course of our gaming sessions, and he would only address her as Leucosia, the name of her D&D character.

I rebooted the computer again.

When the LOGIN prompt reappeared, I typed in LEUCOSIA.

Then I hit the Enter key.

Every system in the room powered itself on.

The sounds of whirring disk drives, self-test beeps, and other boot-up sounds echoed off the vaulted ceiling.

I ran back over to the Atari 2600 and searched through the giant rack of alphabetized game cartridges beside it until I found the one I was looking for: Adventure.

I shoved it into the Atari and turned the system on, then hit the Reset switch to start the game.

It took me only a few minutes to reach the Secret Room.

I grabbed the sword and used it to slay all three of the dragons.

Then I found the black key, opened the gates of the Black Castle, and ventured into its labyrinth.

The gray dot was hidden right where it was supposed to be.

I picked it up and carried it back across the tiny 8-bit kingdom, then used it to pass through the magic barrier and enter the Secret Room.

But unlike the original Atari game, this Secret Room didn't contain the name of Warren Robinett, Adventure's original programmer.

Instead, at the very center of the screen, there was a large white oval with pixelated edges.

An egg.

The egg.

I stared at the TV screen in stunned silence for a moment.

Then I pulled the Atari joystick to the right, moving my tiny square avatar across the flickering screen.

The TV's mono speaker emitted a brief electronic bip sound as I dropped the gray dot and picked up the egg.

As I did, there was a brilliant flash of light, and then I saw that my avatar was no longer holding a joystick.

Now, cupped in both of my hands, was a large silver egg.

I could see my avatar's warped reflection on its curved surface.

When I finally managed to stop staring at it, I looked up and saw that the double doors on the other side of the room had been replaced with the gate exit -a crystal-edged portal leading back into the foyer of Castle Anorak.

The castle appeared to have been completely restored, even though the OASIS server still wouldn't reset for several more hours.

I took one last look around Halliday's office; then, still clutching the egg in my hands, I walked across the room and stepped through the exit.

As soon as I was through it, I turned around just in time to see the Crystal Gate transform into a large wooden door set into the castle wall.

I opened the wooden door.

Beyond it there was a spiral staircase that led up to the top of Castle Anorak's tallest tower.

There, I found Anorak's study.

Towering shelves lined the room, filled with ancient scrolls and dusty spellbooks.

I walked over to the window and looked out on a stunning view of the surrounding landscape.

It was no longer barren.

The effects of the Cataclyst had been undone, and all of Chthonia appeared to be have been restored along with the castle.

I looked around the room.

Directly beneath the familiar black dragon painting there was an ornate crystal pedestal on which rested a gold chalice encrusted with tiny jewels.

Its diameter matched that of the silver egg I held in my hands.

I placed the egg in the chalice, and it fit perfectly.

In the distance, I heard a fanfare of trumpets, and the egg began to glow.

"You win,"

I heard a voice say.

I turned and saw that Anorak was standing right behind me.

His obsidian black robes seemed to pull most of the sunlight out of the room.

"Congratulations,"

he said, stretching out his long-fingered hand.

I hesitated, wondering if this was another trick.

Or perhaps one final test ...

"The game is over,"

Anorak said, as if he'd read my mind.

"It's time for you to receive your prize."

I looked down at his outstretched hand.

Then, after a moment's hesitation, I took it.

Cascading bolts of blue lightning erupted in the space between us, and their spiderweb tines enveloped us both, as if a surge of power were passing from his avatar into mine.

When the lightning subsided, I saw that Anorak was no longer dressed in his black wizard's robes.

In fact, he no longer looked like Anorak at all.

He was shorter, thinner, and somewhat less handsome.

Now he looked like James Halliday.

Pale.

Middle-aged.

He was dressed in worn jeans and a faded Space Invaders T-shirt.

I looked down at my own avatar and discovered that I was now wearing Anorak's robes.

Then I realized that the icons and readouts around the edge of my display had also changed.

My stats were all completely maxxed out, and I now had a list of spells, inherent powers, and magic items that seemed to scroll on forever.

My avatar's level and hit-point counters both had infinity symbols in front of them.

And my credit readout now displayed a number twelve digits long.

I was a multibillionaire.

"I'm entrusting the care of the OASIS to you now, Parzival,"

Halliday said.

"Your avatar is immortal and all-powerful.

Whatever you want, all you have to do is wish for it.

Pretty sweet, eh?"

He leaned toward me and lowered his voice.

"Do me a favor.

Try and use your powers only for good.

OK?"

"OK,"

I said, in a voice that was barely a whisper.

Halliday smiled, then gestured around us.

"This is your castle now.

I've coded this room so that only your avatar can enter it.

I did this to ensure that you alone have access to this."

He walked over to a bookshelf against the wall and pulled on the spine of one of the volumes it held.

I heard a click; then the bookshelf slid aside, revealing a square metal plate set into the wall.

In the center of the plate there was a comically large red button embossed with a single word: OFF.

"I call this the Big Red Button,"

Halliday said.

"If you press it, it will shut off the entire OASIS and launch a worm that will delete everything stored on the GSS servers, including all of the OASIS source code.

It will shut down the OASIS forever."

He smirked.

"So don't press it unless you're absolutely positive it's the right thing to do, OK?"

He gave me an odd smile.

"I trust your judgment."

Halliday slid the bookshelf back into place, concealing the button once again.

Then he startled me by putting his arm around my shoulders.

"Listen,"

he said, adopting a confidential tone.

"I need to tell you one last thing before I go.

Something I didn't figure out for myself until it was already too late."

He led me over to the window and motioned out at the landscape stretching out beyond it.

"I created the OASIS because I never felt at home in the real world.

I didn't know how to connect with the people there.

I was afraid, for all of my life.

Right up until I knew it was ending.

That was when I realized, as terrifying and painful as reality can be, it's also the only place where you can find true happiness.

Because reality is real.

Do you understand?"

"Yes,"

I said.

"I think I do."

"Good,"

he said, giving me a wink.

"Don't make the same mistake I did.

Don't hide in here forever."

He smiled and took a few steps away from me.

"All right.

I think that covers everything.

It's time for me to blow this pop stand."

Then Halliday began to disappear.

He smiled and waved good-bye as his avatar slowly faded out of existence.

"Good luck, Parzival,"

he said.

"And thanks.

Thanks for playing my game."

Then he was completely gone.

"Are you guys there?"

I said to the empty air a few minutes later.

"Yes!"

Aech said excitedly.

"Can you hear us?"

"Yeah.

I can now.

What happened?"

"The system cut off our voice links to you as soon as you entered Halliday's office, so we couldn't talk to you."

"Luckily, you didn't need our help anyway,"

Shoto said.

"Good job, man."

"Congratulations, Wade,"

I heard Art3mis say.

And I could tell she meant it too.

"Thanks,"

I said.

"But I couldn't have done it without you guys."

"You're right,"

Art3mis said.

"Remember to mention that when you talk to the media.

Og says there are a few hundred reporters on their way here right now."

I glanced back over at the bookshelf that concealed the Big Red Button.

"Did you guys see everything Halliday said to me before he vanished?"

I asked.

"No,"

Art3mis said.

"We saw everything up until he told you to 'try and use your powers only for good.' Then your vidfeed cut out.

What happened after that?"

"Nothing much,"

I said.

"I'll tell you about it later."

"Dude,"

Aech said.

"You've got to check the Scoreboard."

I opened a window and pulled up the Scoreboard.

The list of high scores was gone.

Now the only thing displayed on Halliday's website was an image of my avatar, dressed in Anorak's robes, holding the silver egg, along with the words PARZIVAL WINS!

"What happened to the Sixers?"

I asked.

"The ones who were still inside the gate?"

"We're not sure,"

Aech said.

"Their vidfeeds vanished when the Scoreboard changed."

"Maybe their avatars were killed,"

Shoto said.

"Or maybe ..."

"Maybe they were just ejected from the gate,"

I said.

I pulled up my map of Chthonia and saw that I could now teleport anywhere in the OASIS simply by selecting my desired destination in the atlas.

I zoomed in on Castle Anorak and tapped a spot just outside the front entrance, and in a blink, my avatar was standing there.

I was right.

When I'd cleared the Third Gate, the eighteen Sixer avatars who were still inside had been ejected from the gate and deposited in front of the castle.

They were all standing there with confused looks on their faces when I appeared in front of them, resplendent in my new threads.

They all stared at me in silence for a few seconds, then pulled out guns and swords, preparing to attack.

They all looked identical, so I couldn't tell which one was being controlled by Sorrento.

But at this point, I didn't really care.

Using my avatar's new superuser interface, I made a sweeping gesture with my hand, selecting all of the Sixer avatars on my display.

Their outlines began to glow red.

Then I tapped the skull-and-crossbones icon that now appeared on my avatar's toolbar.

All eighteen Sixer avatars instantly dropped dead.

Their bodies slowly faded out of existence, each leaving behind a tiny pile of weapons and loot.

"Holy shit!"

I heard Shoto say over the comlink.

"How did you do that?"

"You heard Halliday,"

Aech said.

"His avatar is immortal and all-powerful."

"Yeah,"

I said.

"He wasn't kidding, either."

"Halliday also said you could wish for whatever you wanted,"

Aech said.

"What are you gonna wish for first?"

I thought about that for a second; then I tapped the new Command icon that now appeared at the edge of my display and said, "I wish for Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto to be resurrected."

A dialog window popped up, asking me to confirm the spelling of each of their avatar names.

Once I did, the system asked me if, in addition to resurrecting their avatars, I wanted to restore all of their lost items, too.

I tapped the Yes icon.

Then a message appeared in the center of my display: RESURRECTION COMPLETE.

AVATARS RESTORED.

"Guys?"

I said.

"You might want to try logging back into your accounts now."

"We're already on our way!"

Aech shouted.

A few seconds later, Shoto logged back into his account, and his avatar materialized a short distance in front of me, in the exact spot where he'd been killed a few hours earlier.

He ran over to me, grinning from ear to ear.

"Arigato, Parzival-san,"

he said, bowing low.

I returned the bow, then threw my arms around him.

"Welcome back,"

I said.

A moment later, Aech emerged from the castle entrance and ran over to join us.

"Good as new,"

he said, grinning down at his restored avatar.

"Thanks, Z."

"De nada."

I glanced back through the castle's open entrance.

"Where's Art3mis?

She should have reappeared right next to you-"

"She didn't log back in,"

Aech said.

"She said she wanted to go outside and get some fresh air."

"You saw her?

What-?"

I searched for the right words.

"How did she look?"

They both just smiled at me; then Aech rested a hand on my shoulder.

"She said she'd be outside waiting for you.

Whenever you're ready to meet her."

I nodded.

I was about to tap my Log-out icon when Aech held up her-his- hand.

"Wait a second!

Before you log out, you've got to see something,"

he said, opening a window in front of me.

"This is airing on all of the newsfeeds right now.

The feds just took Sorrento in for questioning.

They stormed into IOI headquarters and yanked him right out of his haptic chair!"

A video clip began to play.

Handheld camera footage showed a team of federal agents leading Sorrento across the lobby of the IOI corporate headquarters.

He was still wearing his haptic suit and was shadowed by a gray- haired man in a suit who I assumed was his attorney.

Sorrento looked annoyed more than anything, as if this were all just a mild inconvenience.

The caption along the bottom of the window read: Top IOI Executive Sorrento Accused of Murder.

"The newsfeeds have been playing clips from the simcap of your chatlink session with Sorrento all day,"

Aech said, pausing the clip.

"Especially the part where he threatens to kill you and then blows up your aunt's trailer."

Aech hit Play, and the news clip continued.

The federal agents continued to usher Sorrento through the lobby, which was packed with reporters, all pushing against one another and shouting questions.

The reporter shooting the video we were watching lunged forward and jammed the camera in Sorrento's face.

"Did you give the order to kill Wade Watts personally?"

the reporter shouted.

"How does it feel to know you just lost the contest?"

Sorrento smiled, but didn't reply.

Then his attorney stepped in front of the camera and addressed the reporters.

"The charges leveled against my client are preposterous,"

he said.

"The simcap being circulated is clearly a doctored fake.

We have no other comment at this time."

Sorrento nodded.

He continued to smile as the feds led him out of the building.

"The bastard will probably get off scot-free,"

I said.

"IOI can afford to hire the best lawyers in the world."

"Yes, they can,"

Aech said.

Then he flashed his Cheshire grin.

"But now so can we."

When I stepped out of the immersion bay, Og was standing there waiting for me.

"Well done, Wade!"

he said, pulling me into a crushing bear hug.

"Well done!"

"Thanks, Og."

I was still dazed and felt unsteady on my feet.

"Several chief executives from GSS arrived while you were logged in,"

Og said.

"Along with all of Jim's lawyers.

They're all waiting upstairs.

As you can imagine, they're anxious to speak with you."

"Do I have to talk to them right now?"

"No, of course not!"

He laughed.

"They all work for you now, remember?

Make the bastards wait as long as you like!"

He leaned forward.

"My lawyer is up there too.

He's a good guy.

A real pit bull.

He'll make sure that no one messes with you, OK?"

"Thanks, Og,"

I said.

"I really owe you."

"Nonsense!"

he said.

"I should be thanking you.

I haven't had this much fun in decades!

You did good, kid."

I glanced around uncertainly.

Aech and Shoto were still in their immersion bays, holding an impromptu online press conference.

But Art3mis's bay was empty.

I turned back to Og.

"Do you know which way Art3mis went?"

Og grinned at me, then pointed.

"Up those stairs and out the first door you see,"

he said.

"She said she'd wait for you at the center of my hedge maze."

He smiled.

"It's an easy maze.

It shouldn't take you very long to find her."

I stepped outside and squinted as my eyes adjusted to the light.

The air was warm, and the sun was already high overheard.

There wasn't a cloud in the sky.

It was a beautiful day.

The hedge maze covered several acres of land behind the mansion.

The entrance was designed to look like the facade of a castle, and you entered the maze through its open gates.

The dense hedge walls that comprised the maze were ten feet tall, making it impossible to peek over them, even if you stood on top of one of the benches placed throughout the labyrinth.

I entered the maze and wandered around in circles for a few minutes, confused.

Eventually, I realized that the maze's layout was identical to the labyrinth in Adventure.

After that, it took me only a few more minutes to find my way to the large open area at the maze's center.

A large fountain stood there, with a detailed stone sculpture of Adventure's three duck-shaped dragons.

Each dragon was spitting a stream of water instead of breathing fire.

And then I saw her.

She was sitting on a stone bench, staring into the fountain.

She had her back to me, and her head was tilted down.

Her long black hair spilled down over her right shoulder.

I could see that she was kneading her hands in her lap.

I was afraid to move any closer.

Finally, I worked up the courage to speak.

"Hello,"

I said.

She lifted her head at the sound of my voice, but didn't turn around.

"Hello,"

I heard her say.

And it was her voice.

Art3mis's voice.

The voice I'd spent so many hours listening to.

And that gave me the courage to step forward.

I walked around the fountain and stopped once I was standing directly in front of her.

As she heard me approach, she turned her head away, averting her eyes and keeping me out of her field of vision.

But I could see her.

She looked just as she had in the photo I'd seen.

She had the same Rubenesque body.

The same pale, freckled skin.

The same hazel eyes and raven hair.

The same beautiful round face, with the same reddish birthmark.

But unlike in that photo, she wasn't trying to hide the birthmark with a sweep of her hair.

She had her hair brushed back, so I could see it.

I waited in silence.

But she still wouldn't look up at me.

"You look just like I always pictured you,"

I said.

"Beautiful."

"Really?"

she said softly.

Slowly, she turned to face me, taking in my appearance a little at a time, starting with my feet and then gradually working her way up to my face.

When our eyes finally met, she smiled at me nervously.

"Well, what do you know?

You look just like I always thought you would too,"

she said.

"Butt ugly."

We both laughed, and most of the tension in the air dissipated.

Then we stared into each other's eyes for what seemed like a long time.

It was, I realized, also the very first time.

"We haven't been formally introduced,"

she said.

"I'm Samantha."

"Hello, Samantha.

I'm Wade."

"It's nice to finally meet you in person, Wade."

She patted the bench beside her, and I sat down.

After a long silence, she said, "So what happens now?"

I smiled.

"We're going to use all of the moolah we just won to feed everyone on the planet.

We're going to make the world a better place, right?"

She grinned.

"Don't you want to build a huge interstellar spaceship, load it full of videogames, junk food, and comfy couches, and then get the hell out of here?"

"I'm up for that, too,"

I said.

"If it means I get to spend the rest of my life with you."

She gave me a shy smile.

"We'll have to see,"

she said.

"We just met, you know."

"I'm in love with you."

Her lower lip started to tremble.

"You're sure about that?"

"Yes.

I am.

Because it's true."

She smiled at me, but I also saw that she was crying.

"I'm sorry for breaking things off with you,"

she said.

"For disappearing from your life.

I just-"

"It's OK,"

I said.

"I understand why you did it now."

She looked relieved.

"You do?"

I nodded.

"You did the right thing."

"You think so?"

"We won, didn't we?"

She smiled at me, and I smiled back.

"Listen,"

I said.

"We can take things as slow as you like.

I'm really a nice guy, once you get to know me.

I swear."

She laughed and wiped away a few of her tears, but she didn't say anything.

"Did I mention that I'm also extremely rich?"

I said.

"Of course, so are you, so I don't suppose that's a big selling point."

"You don't need to sell me on anything, Wade,"

she said.

"You're my best friend.

My favorite person."

With what appeared to be some effort, she looked me in the eye.

"I've really missed you, you know that?"

My heart felt like it was on fire.

I took a moment to work up my courage; then I reached out and took her hand.

We sat there awhile, holding hands, reveling in the strange new sensation of actually touching one another.

Some time later, she leaned over and kissed me.

It felt just like all those songs and poems had promised it would.

It felt wonderful.

Like being struck by lightning.

It occurred to me then that for the first time in as long as I could remember, I had absolutely no desire to log back into the OASIS.

Acknowledgments Many of my favorite people were subjected to early drafts of this book, and each of them gave me invaluable feedback and encouragement.

My sincere thanks to Eric Cline, Susan Somers-Willett, Chris Beaver, Harry Knowles, Amber Bird, Ingrid Richter, Sara Sutterfield Winn, Jeff Knight, Hilary Thomas, Anne Miano, Tonie Knight, Nichole Cook, Cristin O'Keefe Aptowicz, Jay Smith, Mike Henry, Jed Strahm, Andy Howell, and Chris Fry.

I'm also indebted to Yfat Reiss Gendell, the Coolest Agent in the Known Universe, who managed to make several of my lifelong dreams come true just a few months after I met her.

Thanks also to Stphanie Abou, Hannah Brown Gordon, Cecilia Campbell-Westlind, and all of the awesome folks at Foundry Literary and Media.

A huge shout-out to the amazing Dan Farah, my friend, manager, and Hollywood partner in crime.

My gratitude also goes out to Donald De Line, Andrew Haas, and Jesse Ehrman at Warner Bros., for believing that this book will make a great movie.

Thanks to the incredibly talented and supportive team at Crown, including Patty Berg, Sarah Breivogel, Jacob Bronstein, David Drake, Jill Flaxman, Jacqui Lebow, Rachelle Mandik, Maya Mavjee, Seth Morris, Michael Palgon, Tina Pohlman, Annsley Rosner, and Molly Stern.

And to my fantastic copyeditor, Deanna Hoak, who found the Secret Room in Adventure back in the day.

I owe a special debt of gratitude to Julian Pavia, my brilliant editor, who believed in my ability as a writer long before I finished this book.

Julian's startling intelligence, insight, and relentless attention to detail helped me shape Ready Player One into the book I'd always wanted it to be, and he made me a better writer in the process.

Finally, I want to thank all of the writers, filmmakers, actors, artists, musicians, programmers, game designers, and geeks whose work I've paid tribute to in this story.

These people have all entertained and enlightened me, and I hope that-like Halliday's hunt-this book will inspire others to seek out their creations.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR Ernest Cline lives in Austin, Texas, where he devotes a large portion of his time to geeking out.

This is his first novel.

For more information please visit:

--- NEXT VOLUME ---

nineteen eighty-four a novel George Orwell NINETEEN EIGHTY-FOUR ERIC ARTHUR BLAIR was born in British India in 1903, the son of a Civil Servant working in the Opium Department.

He attended Eton, but his family could not pay for university, so in 1922 he joined the Indian Imperial Police.

He came to hate imperialism, and when he returned to England in 1927 he decided to resign and become a writer.

In the spring of 1928, he moved to Paris, hoping to make a living as a freelance writer.

His lack of success reduced Blair to taking menial jobs as a dishwasher for a few weeks, principally in a fashionable hotel (the Hotel X), which he later described in his first book, Down and Out in Paris and London.

Ill and penniless, he moved back to England in 1929.

Writing what became Burmese Days, he made frequent forays into tramping as part of what had by now become a book project on the life of the poorest people in society.

Blair completed Down and Out in 1932, and it was published early the next year.

Blair adopted the pen name George Orwell just before Down and Out was published.

In early 1936, Orwell was commissioned to write an account of poverty among the working class in the depressed areas of northern England, which appeared in 1937 as The Road to Wigan Pier.

He was taken into many houses, simply saying that he wanted to see how people lived.

Soon after completing his research for the book, Orwell married Eileen O'Shaughnessy.

In December 1936, Orwell travelled to Spain to fight for the Republican side against Fascists.

Orwell sympathetically describes the egalitarian spirit of revolutionary Barcelona when he arrived in Homage to Catalonia.

His experiences, in particular his and his wife's narrow escape from the Communist purges in Barcelona in June 1937, made him a life-long anti-Stalinist and a firm believer in what he termed Democratic Socialism.

Orwell took a job at the BBC Eastern Service in 1941, supervising broadcasts to India aimed at stimulating Indian interest in the war effort.

He was well aware that he was engaged in propaganda, and wrote that he felt like "an orange that's been trodden on by a very dirty boot".

Despite the good salary, he resigned in September 1943.

In 1944, Orwell finished his anti-Stalinist allegory Animal Farm.

The royalties from Animal Farm were to provide Orwell with a comfortable income for the first time in his adult life.

During 1945, while Orwell was sick in Cologne, Eileen died in Newcastle during surgery.

For the next four years Orwell mixed journalistic work with writing his best-known work, Nineteen Eighty-Four, which was published in 1949.

In October 1949, shortly before his death, he married Sonia Brownell.

GEORGE ORWELL Nineteen Eighty-Four Title: Nineteen Eighty-Four Author: George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair) (19031950) eBook No.: 0100021.txt Language: English Date first posted: August 2001 Date most recently updated: August 2001 Project Gutenberg of Australia eBooks are created from printed editions which do NOT keep any eBooks in compliance with a particular paper edition.

laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this file.

This eBook is made available at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.

You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg of Australia License which may be viewed online at PART ONE It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen.

Winston Smith, his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape the vile wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansions, though not quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from entering along with him.

The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats.

At one end of it a coloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall.

It depicted simply an enormous face, more than a metre wide: the face of a man of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsome features.

Winston made for the stairs.

It was no use trying the lift.

Even at the best of times it was seldom working, and at present the electric curr ent was cut off during daylight hours.

It was part of the economy drive in preparation for Hate Week.

The flat was seven flights up, and Winston, who was thirty-nine and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, went slowly, resting several times on the way.

On each landing, opposite the lift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall.

It was one of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you about when you move.

BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption beneath it ran.

Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of figures which had something to do with the production of pig-iron.

The voice came from an oblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface of the right-hand wall.

Winston turned a switch and the voice sank somewhat, though the words were still distinguishable.

The instrument (the telescreen, it was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way of shutting it off completely.

He moved over to the window: a smallish, frail figure, the meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue over- alls which were the uniform of the party.

His hair was very fair, his face naturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razor blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended.

Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold.

Down in the street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into spirals, and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there seemed to be no colour in anything, except the posters that were plastered everywhere.

The black- moustachio'd face gazed down from every commanding corner.

There was one on the house-front immediately opposite.

BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep into Winston's own.

Down at street level another poster, torn at one corner, flapped fitfully in the wind, alternately covering and uncovering the single word INGSOC.

In the far distance a helicopter skimmed down between the roofs, hovered for an instant like a bluebottle, and darted away again with a curving flight.

It was the police patrol, snooping into people's windows.

The patrols did not matter, however.

Only the Thought Police mattered.

Behind Winston's back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away about pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three-Year Plan.

The telescreen received and transmitted simulta- neously.

Any sound that Winston made, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it, moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metal plaque com- manded, he could be seen as well as heard.

There was of course no way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment.

How often, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individual wire was guesswork.

It was even conceivable that they watched everybody all the time.

But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted to.

You had to live- did live, from habit that became instinct- in the assumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except in darkness, every movement scrutinized.

Winston kept his back turned to the telescreen.

It was safer; though, as he well knew, even a back can be revealing.

A kilome- tre away the Ministry of Truth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape.

This, he thought with a sort of vague distaste- this was London, chief city of Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces of Oceania.

He tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him whether London had always been quite like this.

Were there always these vistas of rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up with baulks of timber, their windows patched with cardboard and their roofs with corrugated iron, their crazy garden walls sagging in all directions?

And the bombed sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and the willow-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places where the bombs had cleared a larger patch and there had sprung up sordid colonies of wooden dwellings like chicken-houses?

But it was no use, he could not remember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of bright-lit tableaux occurring against no back- ground and mostly unintelligible.

The Ministry of Truth- Minitrue, in Newspeak [Newspeak was the official language of Oceania.

For an account of its struc- ture and etymology see Appendix.]- was startlingly different from any other object in sight.

It was an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white concrete, soaring up, terrace after ter- race, 300 metres into the air.

From where Winston stood it was just possible to read, picked out on its white face in elegant letter- ing, the three slogans of the Party: WAR IS PEACE FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms above ground level, and corresponding ramifications below.

Scattered about London there were just three other build- ings of similar appearance and size.

So completely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roof of Victory Mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously.

They were the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatus of government was divided.

The Ministry of Truth, which concerned itself with news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts.

The Ministry of Peace, which concerned itself with war.

The Ministry of Love, which maintained law and order.

And the Ministry of Plenty, which was responsible for economic affairs.

Their names, in Newspeak: Minitrue, Minipax, Miniluv, and Miniplenty.

The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one.

There were no windows in it at all.

Winston had never been inside the Ministry of Love, nor within half a kilometre of it.

It was a place impossible to enter except on official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze of barbed-wire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-gun nests.

Even the streets leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-faced guards in black uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons.

Winston turned round abruptly.

He had set his features into the expression of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facing the telescreen.

He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen.

By leaving the Ministry at this time of day he had sacrificed his lunch in the canteen, and he was aware that there was no food in the kitchen except a hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got to be saved for tomorrow's breakfast.

He took down from the shelf a bottle of colourless liquid with a plain white label marked VICTORY GIN.

It gave off a sickly, oily smell, as of Chinese rice- spirit.

Winston poured out nearly a teacupful, nerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of medicine.

Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes.

The stuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one had the sensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club.

The next moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the world began to look more cheerful.

He took a cigarette from a crumpled packet marked VICTORY CIGA- RETTES and incautiously held it upright, whereupon the tobacco fell out on to the floor.

With the next he was more successful.

He went back to the living-room and sat down at a small table that stood to the left of the telescreen.

From the table drawer he took out a penholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto-sized blank book with a red back and a marbled cover.

For some reason the telescreen in the living-room was in an unusual position.

Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, where it could command the whole room, it was in the longer wall, opposite the window.

To one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which Winston was now sitting, and which, when the flats were built, had probably been intended to hold bookshelves.

By sitting in the alcove, and keeping well back, Winston was able to remain outside the range of the telescreen, so far as sight went.

He could be heard, of course, but so long as he stayed in his present position he could not be seen.

It was partly the unusual geography of the room that had suggested to him the thing that he was now about to do.

But it had also been suggested by the book that he had just taken out of the drawer.

It was a peculiarly beautiful book.

Its smooth creamy paper, a little yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured for at least forty years past.

He could guess, however, that the book was much older than that.

He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy little junk-shop in a slummy quarter of the town (just what quarter he did not now remember) and had been stricken immediately by an overwhelm- ing desire to possess it.

Party members were supposed not to go into ordinary shops ('dealing on the free market', it was called), but the rule was not strictly kept, because there were various things, such as shoelaces and razor blades, which it was impossi- ble to get hold of in any other way.

He had given a quick glance up and down the street and then had slipped inside and bought the book for two dollars fifty.

At the time he was not conscious of wanting it for any particular purpose.

He had carried it guiltily home in his briefcase.

Even with nothing written in it, it was a compromising possession.

The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary.

This was not illegal (nothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detected it was reasonably certain that it would be punished by death, or at least by twenty-five years in a forced- labour camp.

Winston fitted a nib into the penholder and sucked it to get the grease off.

The pen was an archaic instrument, seldom used even for signatures, and he had procured one, furtively and with some difficulty, simply because of a feeling that the beautiful creamy paper deserved to be written on with a real nib instead of being scratched with an ink-pencil.

Actually he was not used to writing by hand.

Apart from very short notes, it was usual to dic- tate everything into the speak-write which was of course impossible for his present purpose.

He dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for just a second.

A tremor had gone through his bowels.

To mark the paper was the decisive act.

In small clumsy letters he wrote: April 4th, 1984.

He sat back.

A sense of complete helplessness had descended upon him.

To begin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984.

It must be round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age was thirty-nine, and he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945; but it was never possible nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two.

For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writ- ing this diary?

For the future, for the unborn.

His mind hovered for a moment round the doubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against the Newspeak word DOUBLE- THINK.

For the first time the magnitude of what he had undertaken came home to him.

How could you communicate with the future?

It was of its nature impossible.

Either the future would resemble the present, in which case it would not listen to him: or it would be different from it, and his predicament would be meaningless.

For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper.

The tele- screen had changed over to strident military music.

It was curious that he seemed not merely to have lost the power of expressing himself, but even to have forgotten what it was that he had origi- nally intended to say.

For weeks past he had been making ready for this moment, and it had never crossed his mind that anything would be needed except courage.

The actual writing would be easy.

All he had to do was to transfer to paper the interminable restless monologue that had been running inside his head, literally for years.

At this moment, however, even the monologue had dried up.

Moreover his varicose ulcer had begun itching unbear- ably.

He dared not scratch it, because if he did so it always became inflamed.

The seconds were ticking by.

He was conscious of noth- ing except the blankness of the page in front of him, the itching of the skin above his ankle, the blaring of the music, and a slight booziness caused by the gin.

Suddenly he began writing in sheer panic, only imperfectly aware of what he was setting down.

His small but childish hand- writing straggled up and down the page, shedding first its capital letters and finally even its full stops: April 4th, 1984.

Last night to the flicks.

All war films.

One very good one of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterranean.

Audience much amused by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim away with a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing along in the water like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights, then he was full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank as suddenly as though the holes had let in the water, audience shouting with laughter when he sank.

then you saw a lifeboat full of children with a helicopter hovering over it.

there was a middle-aged woman might have been a jewess sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old in her arms.

little boy screaming with fright and hiding his head between her breasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the woman putting her arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with fright herself, all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thought her arms could keep the bullets off him.

then the helicopter planted a 20 kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to matchwood.

then there was a wonderful shot of a child's arm going up up up right up into the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed it up and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down in the prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shouting they didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it aint right not in front of kids it aint until the police turned her turned her out i dont suppose anything happened to her nobody cares what the proles say typical prole reaction they never-- Winston stopped writing, partly because he was suffering from cramp.

He did not know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish.

But the curious thing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory had clarified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal to writing it down.

It was, he now realized, because of this other incident that he had suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today.

It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if anything so nebulous could be said to happen.

It was nearly eleven hundred, and in the Records Department, where Winston worked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping them in the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in preparation for the Two Minutes Hate.

Winston was just taking his place in one of the middle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had never spoken to, came unexpectedly into the room.

One of them was a girl whom he often passed in the corridors.

He did not know her name, but he knew that she worked in the Fiction Department.

Presumably- since he had sometimes seen her with oily hands and carrying a spanner- she had some mechanical job on one of the novel-writ- ing machines.

She was a bold-looking girl, of about twenty-seven, with thick hair, a freckled face, and swift, athletic movements.

A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior Anti-Sex League, was wound several times round the waist of her overalls, just tightly enough to bring out the shapeliness of her hips.

Winston had dis- liked her from the very first moment of seeing her.

He knew the reason.

It was because of the atmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and general clean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her.

He disliked nearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones.

It was always the women, and above all the young ones, who were the most big- oted adherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies and nosers-out of unorthodoxy.

But this particular girl gave him the impression of being more dangerous than most.

Once when they passed in the corridor she gave him a quick side- long glance which seemed to pierce right into him and for a moment had filled him with black terror.

The idea had even crossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police.

That, it was true, was very unlikely.

Still, he continued to feel a peculiar uneasiness, which had fear mixed up in it as well as hos- tility, whenever she was anywhere near him.

The other person was a man named O'Brien, a member of the Inner Party and holder of some post so important and remote that Winston had only a dim idea of its nature.

A momentary hush passed over the group of people round the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party member approaching.

O'Brien was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarse, humorous, brutal face.

In spite of his formidable appearance he had a certain charm of manner.

He had a trick of resettling his spectacles on his nose which was curiously disarming- in some indefinable way, curiously civilized.

It was a gesture which, if anyone had still thought in such terms, might have recalled an eighteenth-century nobleman offering his snuffbox.

Winston had seen O'Brien per- haps a dozen times in almost as many years.

He felt deeply drawn to him, and not solely because he was intrigued by the contrast between O'Brien's urbane manner and his prize-fighter's physique.

Much more it was because of a secretly held belief- or perhaps not even a belief, merely a hope- that O'Brien's political ortho- doxy was not perfect.

Something in his face suggested it irresistibly.

And again, perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written in his face, but simply intelligence.

But at any rate he had the appearance of being a person that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen and get him alone.

Winston had never made the smallest effort to verify this guess: indeed, there was no way of doing so.

At this moment O'Brien glanced at his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundred, and evidently decided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes Hate was over.

He took a chair in the same row as Winston, a couple of places away.

A small, sandy-haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to Winston was between them.

The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind.

The next moment a hideous, grinding speech, as of some mon- strous machine running without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the room.

It was a noise that set one's teeth on edge and bristled the hair at the back of one's neck.

The Hate had started.

As usual, the face of Emmanuel Goldstein, the Enemy of the People, had flashed on to the screen.

There were hisses here and there among the audience.

The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear and disgust.

Goldstein was the renegade and backslider who once, long ago (how long ago, nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leading figures of the Party, almost on a level with Big Brother himself, and then had engaged in counter-revolutionary activities, had been condemned to death, and had mysteriously escaped and disappeared.

The programmes of the Two Minutes Hate varied from day to day, but there was none in which Goldstein was not the principal figure.

He was the primal traitor, the earliest defiler of the Party's purity.

All subse- quent crimes against the Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, deviations, sprang directly out of his teaching.

Somewhere or other he was still alive and hatching his conspira- cies: perhaps somewhere beyond the sea, under the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even- so it was occasionally rumoured- in some hiding-place in Oceania itself.

Winston's diaphragm was constricted.

He could never see the face of Goldstein without a painful mixture of emotions.

It was a lean Jewish face, with a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard- a clever face, and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senile silliness in the long thin nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacles was perched.

It resem- bled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had a sheep-like quality.

Goldstein was delivering his usual venomous attack upon the doctrines of the Party- an attack so exaggerated and perverse that a child should have been able to see through it, and yet just plausible enough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other people, less level-headed than oneself, might be taken in by it.

He was abusing Big Brother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the Party, he was demanding the immediate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he was advocating freedom of speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of assembly, freedom of thought, he was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed- and all this in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of the habit- ual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeak words: more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would normally use in real life.

And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as to the reality which Goldstein's specious clap- trap covered, behind his head on the telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army- row after row of solid- looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swam up to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by others exactly similar.

The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers' boots formed the background to Goldstein's bleating voice.

Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncontrol- lable exclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room.

The self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying power of the Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne: besides, the sight or even the thought of Goldstein produced fear and anger automatically.

He was an object of hatred more constant than either Eurasia or Eastasia, since when Oceania was at war with one of these Powers it was generally at peace with the other.

But what was strange was that although Goldstein was hated and despised by everybody, although every day and a thousand times a day, on platforms, on the telescreen, in newspapers, in books, his theories were refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to the general gaze for the pitiful rub- bish that they were- in spite of all this, his influence never seemed to grow less.

Always there were fresh dupes waiting to be seduced by him.

A day never passed when spies and saboteurs acting under his directions were not unmasked by the Thought Police.

He was the commander of a vast shadowy army, an under- ground network of conspirators dedicated to the overthrow of the State.

The Brotherhood, its name was supposed to be.

There were also whispered stories of a terrible book, a compendium of all the heresies, of which Goldstein was the author and which circulated clandestinely here and there.

It was a book without a title.

People referred to it, if at all, simply as THE BOOK.

But one knew of such things only through vague rumours.

Neither the Brotherhood nor THE BOOK was a subject that any ordinary Party member would mention if there was a way of avoiding it.

In its second minute the Hate rose to a frenzy.

People were leap- ing up and down in their places and shouting at the tops of their voices in an effort to drown the maddening bleating voice that came from the screen.

The little sandy-haired woman had turned bright pink, and her mouth was opening and shutting like that of a landed fish.

Even O'Brien's heavy face was flushed.

He was sit- ting very straight in his chair, his powerful chest swelling and quivering as though he were standing up to the assault of a wave.

The dark-haired girl behind Winston had begun crying out 'Swine!

Swine!

Swine!' and suddenly she picked up a heavy Newspeak dictionary and flung it at the screen.

It struck Goldstein's nose and bounced off; the voice continued inexorably.

In a lucid moment Winston found that he was shouting with the others and kicking his heel violently against the rung of his chair.

The horrible thing about the Two Minutes Hate was not that one was obliged to act a part, but, on the contrary, that it was impos- sible to avoid joining in.

Within thirty seconds any pretence was always unnecessary.

A hideous ecstasy of fear and vindictiveness, a desire to kill, to torture, to smash faces in with a sledge-hammer, seemed to flow through the whole group of people like an electric current, turning one even against one's will into a grimacing, screaming lunatic.

And yet the rage that one felt was an abstract, undirected emotion which could be switched from one object to another like the flame of a blowlamp.

Thus, at one moment Winston's hatred was not turned against Goldstein at all, but, on the contrary, against Big Brother, the Party, and the Thought Police; and at such moments his heart went out to the lonely, derided heretic on the screen, sole guardian of truth and sanity in a world of lies.

And yet the very next instant he was at one with the people about him, and all that was said of Goldstein seemed to him to be true.

At those moments his secret loathing of Big Brother changed into adoration, and Big Brother seemed to tower up, an invincible, fearless protector, standing like a rock against the hordes of Asia, and Goldstein, in spite of his isolation, his helplessness, and the doubt that hung about his very existence, seemed like some sinister enchanter, capable by the mere power of his voice of wrecking the structure of civilization.

It was even possible, at moments, to switch one's hatred this way or that by a voluntary act.

Suddenly, by the sort of violent effort with which one wrenches one's head away from the pillow in a nightmare, Winston succeeded in transferring his hatred from the face on the screen to the dark-haired girl behind him.

Vivid, beautiful hallucinations flashed through his mind.

He would flog her to death with a rubber truncheon.

He would tie her naked to a stake and shoot her full of arrows like Saint Sebastian.

He would ravish her and cut her throat at the moment of climax.

Better than before, moreover, he realized WHY it was that he hated her.

He hated her because she was young and pretty and sexless, because he wanted to go to bed with her and would never do so, because round her sweet supple waist, which seemed to ask you to encircle it with your arm, there was only the odious scar- let sash, aggressive symbol of chastity.

The Hate rose to its climax.

The voice of Goldstein had become an actual sheep's bleat, and for an instant the face changed into that of a sheep.

Then the sheep-face melted into the figure of a Eurasian soldier who seemed to be advancing, huge and terrible, his sub-machine gun roaring, and seeming to spring out of the sur- face of the screen, so that some of the people in the front row actually flinched backwards in their seats.

But in the same moment, drawing a deep sigh of relief from everybody, the hostile figure melted into the face of Big Brother, black-haired, black- moustachio'd, full of power and mysterious calm, and so vast that it almost filled up the screen.

Nobody heard what Big Brother was saying.

It was merely a few words of encouragement, the sort of words that are uttered in the din of battle, not distinguishable individually but restoring confidence by the fact of being spoken.

Then the face of Big Brother faded away again, and instead the three slogans of the Party stood out in bold capitals: WAR IS PEACE FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH But the face of Big Brother seemed to persist for several seconds on the screen, as though the impact that it had made on every- one's eyeballs was too vivid to wear off immediately.

The little sandy-haired woman had flung herself forward over the back of the chair in front of her.

With a tremulous murmur that sounded like 'My Saviour!' she extended her arms towards the screen.

Then she buried her face in her hands.

It was apparent that she was uttering a prayer.

At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slow, rhythmical chant of 'B-B!...B-B!'- over and over again, very slowly, with a long pause between the first 'B' and the second- a heavy, murmurous sound, somehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to hear the stamp of naked feet and the throbbing of tom-toms.

For perhaps as much as thirty seconds they kept it up.

It was a refrain that was often heard in moments of overwhelming emotion.

Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdom and majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis, a deliberate drowning of con- sciousness by means of rhythmic noise.

Winston's entrails seemed to grow cold.

In the Two Minutes Hate he could not help sharing in the general delirium, but this sub-human chanting of 'B-B!...B- B!' always filled him with horror.

Of course he chanted with the rest: it was impossible to do otherwise.

To dissemble your feel- ings, to control your face, to do what everyone else was doing, was an instinctive reaction.

But there was a space of a couple of seconds during which the expression of his eyes might conceiv- ably have betrayed him.

And it was exactly at this moment that the significant thing happened- if, indeed, it did happen.

Momentarily he caught O'Brien's eye.

O'Brien had stood up.

He had taken off his spectacles and was in the act of resettling them on his nose with his characteristic gesture.

But there was a fraction of a second when their eyes met, and for as long as it took to happen Winston knew- yes, he KNEW!- that O'Brien was thinking the same thing as himself.

An unmistakable message had passed.

It was as though their two minds had opened and the thoughts were flowing from one into the other through their eyes.

'I am with you,' O'Brien seemed to be saying to him.

'I know pre- cisely what you are feeling.

I know all about your contempt, your hatred, your disgust.

But don't worry, I am on your side!' And then the flash of intelligence was gone, and O'Brien's face was as inscrutable as everybody else's.

That was all, and he was already uncertain whether it had hap- pened.

Such incidents never had any sequel.

All that they did was to keep alive in him the belief, or hope, that others besides himself were the enemies of the Party.

Perhaps the rumours of vast under- ground conspiracies were true after all- perhaps the Brotherhood really existed!

It was impossible, in spite of the endless arrests and confessions and executions, to be sure that the Brotherhood was not simply a myth.

Some days he believed in it, some days not.

There was no evidence, only fleeting glimpses that might mean anything or nothing: snatches of overheard conversation, faint scribbles on lavatory walls- once, even, when two strangers met, a small movement of the hand which had looked as though it might be a signal of recognition.

It was all guesswork: very likely he had imagined everything.

He had gone back to his cubicle without looking at O'Brien again.

The idea of following up their momentary contact hardly crossed his mind.

It would have been inconceivably dangerous even if he had known how to set about doing it.

For a second, two seconds, they had exchanged an equiv- ocal glance, and that was the end of the story.

But even that was a memorable event, in the locked loneliness in which one had to live.

Winston roused himself and sat up straighter.

He let out a belch.

The gin was rising from his stomach.

His eyes re-focused on the page.

He discovered that while he sat helplessly musing he had also been writing, as though by auto- matic action.

And it was no longer the same cramped, awkward handwriting as before.

His pen had slid voluptuously over the smooth paper, printing in large neat capitals- DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER over and over again, filling half a page.

He could not help feeling a twinge of panic.

It was absurd, since the writing of those particular words was not more danger- ous than the initial act of opening the diary, but for a moment he was tempted to tear out the spoiled pages and abandon the enter- prise altogether.

He did not do so, however, because he knew that it was useless.

Whether he wrote DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER, or whether he refrained from writing it, made no difference.

Whether he went on with the diary, or whether he did not go on with it, made no difference.

The Thought Police would get him just the same.

He had committed- would still have committed, even if he had never set pen to paper- the essential crime that contained all others in itself.

Thoughtcrime, they called it.

Thoughtcrime was not a thing that could be concealed for ever.

You might dodge successfully for a while, even for years, but sooner or later they were bound to get you.

It was always at night- the arrests invariably happened at night.

The sudden jerk out of sleep, the rough hand shaking your shoulder, the lights glaring in your eyes, the ring of hard faces round the bed.

In the vast majority of cases there was no trial, no report of the arrest.

People simply disappeared, always during the night.

Your name was removed from the registers, every record of everything you had ever done was wiped out, your one-time exis- tence was denied and then forgotten.

You were abolished, annihilated: VAPORIZED was the usual word.

For a moment he was seized by a kind of hysteria.

He began writing in a hurried untidy scrawl: theyll shoot me i don't care theyll shoot me in the back of the neck i dont care down with big brother they always shoot you in the back of the neck i dont care down with big brother-- He sat back in his chair, slightly ashamed of himself, and laid down the pen.

The next moment he started violently.

There was a knocking at the door.

Already!

He sat as still as a mouse, in the futile hope that who- ever it was might go away after a single attempt.

But no, the knocking was repeated.

The worst thing of all would be to delay.

His heart was thumping like a drum, but his face, from long habit, was probably expressionless.

He got up and moved heavily towards the door.

As he put his hand to the door-knob Winston saw that he had left the diary open on the table.

DOWN WITH BIG BROTHER was written all over it, in letters almost big enough to be legible across the room.

It was an inconceivably stupid thing to have done.

But, he realized, even in his panic he had not wanted to smudge the creamy paper by shutting the book while the ink was wet.

He drew in his breath and opened the door.

Instantly a warm wave of relief flowed through him.

A colourless, crushed-looking woman, with wispy hair and a lined face, was standing outside.

'Oh, comrade,' she began in a dreary, whining sort of voice, 'I thought I heard you come in.

Do you think you could come across and have a look at our kitchen sink?

It's got blocked up and--' It was Mrs Parsons, the wife of a neighbour on the same floor.

('Mrs' was a word somewhat discountenanced by the Party- you were supposed to call everyone 'comrade'- but with some women one used it instinctively.) She was a woman of about thirty, but looking much older.

One had the impression that there was dust in the creases of her face.

Winston followed her down the passage.

These amateur repair jobs were an almost daily irri- tation.

Victory Mansions were old flats, built in 1930 or thereabouts, and were falling to pieces.

The plaster flaked con- stantly from ceilings and walls, the pipes burst in every hard frost, the roof leaked whenever there was snow, the heating system was usually running at half steam when it was not closed down alto- gether from motives of economy.

Repairs, except what you could do for yourself, had to be sanctioned by remote committees which were liable to hold up even the mending of a window-pane for two years.

'Of course it's only because Tom isn't home,' said Mrs Parsons vaguely.

The Parsons' flat was bigger than Winston's, and dingy in a dif- ferent way.

Everything had a battered, trampled-on look, as though the place had just been visited by some large violent animal.

Games impedimenta- hockey-sticks, boxing-gloves, a burst football, a pair of sweaty shorts turned inside out- lay all over the floor, and on the table there was a litter of dirty dishes and dog-eared exercise-books.

On the walls were scarlet banners of the Youth League and the Spies, and a full-sized poster of Big Brother.

There was the usual boiled-cabbage smell, common to the whole building, but it was shot through by a sharper reek of sweat, which- one knew this at the first sniff, though it was hard to say how- was the sweat of some person not present at the moment.

In another room someone with a comb and a piece of toilet paper was trying to keep tune with the military music which was still issuing from the telescreen.

'It's the children,' said Mrs Parsons, casting a half-apprehen- sive glance at the door.

'They haven't been out today.

And of course--' She had a habit of breaking off her sentences in the middle.

The kitchen sink was full nearly to the brim with filthy greenish water which smelt worse than ever of cabbage.

Winston knelt down and examined the angle-joint of the pipe.

He hated using his hands, and he hated bending down, which was always liable to start him coughing.

Mrs Parsons looked on helplessly.

'Of course if Tom was home he'd put it right in a moment,' she said.

'He loves anything like that.

He's ever so good with his hands, Tom is.' Parsons was Winston's fellow-employee at the Ministry of Truth.

He was a fattish but active man of paralysing stupidity, a mass of imbecile enthusiasms- one of those completely unques- tioning, devoted drudges on whom, more even than on the Thought Police, the stability of the Party depended.

At thirty-five he had just been unwillingly evicted from the Youth League, and before graduating into the Youth League he had managed to stay on in the Spies for a year beyond the statutory age.

At the Ministry he was employed in some subordinate post for which intelligence was not required, but on the other hand he was a lead- ing figure on the Sports Committee and all the other committees engaged in organizing community hikes, spontaneous demonstra- tions, savings campaigns, and voluntary activities generally.

He would inform you with quiet pride, between whiffs of his pipe, that he had put in an appearance at the Community Centre every evening for the past four years.

An overpowering smell of sweat, a sort of unconscious testimony to the strenuousness of his life, followed him about wherever he went, and even remained behind him after he had gone.

'Have you got a spanner?' said Winston, fiddling with the nut on the angle-joint.

'A spanner,' said Mrs Parsons, immediately becoming inverte- brate.

'I don't know, I'm sure.

Perhaps the children--' There was a trampling of boots and another blast on the comb as the children charged into the living-room.

Mrs Parsons brought the spanner.

Winston let out the water and disgustedly removed the clot of human hair that had blocked up the pipe.

He cleaned his fingers as best he could in the cold water from the tap and went back into the other room.

'Up with your hands!' yelled a savage voice.

A handsome, tough-looking boy of nine had popped up from behind the table and was menacing him with a toy automatic pistol, while his small sister, about two years younger, made the same gesture with a fragment of wood.

Both of them were dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirts, and red neckerchiefs which were the uniform of the Spies.

Winston raised his hands above his head, but with an uneasy feeling, so vicious was the boy's demeanour, that it was not altogether a game.

'You're a traitor!' yelled the boy.

'You're a thought-criminal!

You're a Eurasian spy!

I'll shoot you, I'll vaporize you, I'll send you to the salt mines!' Suddenly they were both leaping round him, shouting 'Traitor!' and 'Thought-criminal!' the little girl imitating her brother in every movement.

It was somehow slightly frightening, like the gambolling of tiger cubs which will soon grow up into man- eaters.

There was a sort of calculating ferocity in the boy's eye, a quite evident desire to hit or kick Winston and a consciousness of being very nearly big enough to do so.

It was a good job it was not a real pistol he was holding, Winston thought.

Mrs Parsons' eyes flitted nervously from Winston to the chil- dren, and back again.

In the better light of the living-room he noticed with interest that there actually was dust in the creases of her face.

'They do get so noisy,' she said.

'They're disappointed because they couldn't go to see the hanging, that's what it is.

I'm too busy to take them.

and Tom won't be back from work in time.' 'Why can't we go and see the hanging?' roared the boy in his huge voice.

'Want to see the hanging!

Want to see the hanging!' chanted the little girl, still capering round.

Some Eurasian prisoners, guilty of war crimes, were to be hanged in the Park that evening, Winston remembered.

This hap- pened about once a month, and was a popular spectacle.

Children always clamoured to be taken to see it.

He took his leave of Mrs Parsons and made for the door.

But he had not gone six steps down the passage when something hit the back of his neck an ago- nizingly painful blow.

It was as though a red-hot wire had been jabbed into him.

He spun round just in time to see Mrs Parsons dragging her son back into the doorway while the boy pocketed a catapult.

'Goldstein!' bellowed the boy as the door closed on him.

But what most struck Winston was the look of helpless fright on the woman's greyish face.

Back in the flat he stepped quickly past the telescreen and sat down at the table again, still rubbing his neck.

The music from the telescreen had stopped.

Instead, a clipped military voice was reading out, with a sort of brutal relish, a description of the arma- ments of the new Floating Fortress which had just been anchored between Iceland and the Faroe Islands.

With those children, he thought, that wretched woman must lead a life of terror.

Another year, two years, and they would be watching her night and day for symptoms of unorthodoxy.

Nearly all children nowadays were horrible.

What was worst of all was that by means of such organizations as the Spies they were sys- tematically turned into ungovernable little savages, and yet this produced in them no tendency whatever to rebel against the dis- cipline of the Party.

On the contrary, they adored the Party and everything connected with it.

The songs, the processions, the ban- ners, the hiking, the drilling with dummy rifles, the yelling of slogans, the worship of Big Brother- it was all a sort of glorious game to them.

All their ferocity was turned outwards, against the enemies of the State, against foreigners, traitors, saboteurs, thought-criminals.

It was almost normal for people over thirty to be frightened of their own children.

And with good reason, for hardly a week passed in which 'The Times' did not carry a para- graph describing how some eavesdropping little sneak- 'child hero' was the phrase generally used- had overheard some com- promising remark and denounced its parents to the Thought Police.

The sting of the catapult bullet had worn off.

He picked up his pen half-heartedly, wondering whether he could find something more to write in the diary.

Suddenly he began thinking of O'Brien again.

Years ago- how long was it?

Seven years it must be- he had dreamed that he was walking through a pitch-dark room.

And someone sitting to one side of him had said as he passed: 'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness.' It was said very qui- etly, almost casually- a statement, not a command.

He had walked on without pausing.

What was curious was that at the time, in the dream, the words had not made much impression on him.

It was only later and by degrees that they had seemed to take on significance.

He could not now remember whether it was before or after having the dream that he had seen O'Brien for the first time, nor could he remember when he had first identified the voice as O'Brien's.

But at any rate the identification existed.

It was O'Brien who had spoken to him out of the dark.

Winston had never been able to feel sure- even after this morning's flash of the eyes it was still impossible to be sure whether O'Brien was a friend or an enemy.

Nor did it even seem to matter greatly.

There was a link of understanding between them, more important than affection or partisanship.

'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' he had said.

Winston did not know what it meant, only that in some way or another it would come true.

The voice from the telescreen paused.

A trumpet call, clear and beautiful, floated into the stagnant air.

The voice continued rasp- ingly: 'Attention!

Your attention, please!

A newsflash has this moment arrived from the Malabar front.

Our forces in South India have won a glorious victory.

I am authorized to say that the action we are now reporting may well bring the war within meas- urable distance of its end.

Here is the newsflash-' Bad news coming, thought Winston.

And sure enough, follow- ing on a gory description of the annihilation of a Eurasian army, with stupendous figures of killed and prisoners, came the announcement that, as from next week, the chocolate ration would be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty.

Winston belched again.

The gin was wearing off, leaving a deflated feeling.

The telescreen- perhaps to celebrate the victory, perhaps to drown the memory of the lost chocolate- crashed into 'Oceania, 'tis for thee'.

You were supposed to stand to attention.

However, in his present position he was invisible.

'Oceania, 'tis for thee' gave way to lighter music.

Winston walked over to the window, keeping his back to the telescreen.

The day was still cold and clear.

Somewhere far away a rocket bomb exploded with a dull, reverberating roar.

About twenty or thirty of them a week were falling on London at present.

Down in the street the wind flapped the torn poster to and fro, and the word INGSOC fitfully appeared and vanished.

Ingsoc.

The sacred principles of Ingsoc.

Newspeak, doublethink, the mutability of the past.

He felt as though he were wandering in the forests of the sea bottom, lost in a monstrous world where he him- self was the monster.

He was alone.

The past was dead, the future was unimaginable.

What certainty had he that a single human creature now living was on his side?

And what way of knowing that the dominion of the Party would not endure FOR EVER?

Like an answer, the three slogans on the white face of the Ministry of Truth came back to him: WAR IS PEACE FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH He took a twenty-five cent piece out of his pocket.

There, too, in tiny clear lettering, the same slogans were inscribed, and on the other face of the coin the head of Big Brother.

Even from the coin the eyes pursued you.

On coins, on stamps, on the covers of books, on banners, on posters, and on the wrappings of a ciga- rette packet- everywhere.

Always the eyes watching you and the voice enveloping you.

Asleep or awake, working or eating, indoors or out of doors, in the bath or in bed- no escape.

Nothing was your own except the few cubic centimetres inside your skull.

The sun had shifted round, and the myriad windows of the Ministry of Truth, with the light no longer shining on them, looked grim as the loopholes of a fortress.

His heart quailed before the enormous pyramidal shape.

It was too strong, it could not be stormed.

A thousand rocket bombs would not batter it down.

He wondered again for whom he was writing the diary.

For the future, for the past- for an age that might be imaginary.

And in front of him there lay not death but annihilation.

The diary would be reduced to ashes and himself to vapour.

Only the Thought Police would read what he had written, before they wiped it out of existence and out of memory.

How could you make appeal to the future when not a trace of you, not even an anonymous word scribbled on a piece of paper, could physically survive?

The telescreen struck fourteen.

He must leave in ten minutes.

He had to be back at work by fourteen-thirty.

Curiously, the chiming of the hour seemed to have put new heart into him.

He was a lonely ghost uttering a truth that nobody would ever hear.

But so long as he uttered it, in some obscure way the continuity was not broken.

It was not by making yourself heard but by staying sane that you carried on the human heritage.

He went back to the table, dipped his pen, and wrote: To the future or to the past, to a time when thought is free, when men are different from one another and do not live alone - to a time when truth exists and what is done cannot be undone: From the age of uniformity, from the age of solitude, from the age of Big Brother, from the age of doublethink- greetings!

He was already dead, he reflected.

It seemed to him that it was only now, when he had begun to be able to formulate his thoughts, that he had taken the decisive step.

The consequences of every act are included in the act itself.

He wrote: Thoughtcrime does not entail death: thoughtcrime IS death.

Now he had recognized himself as a dead man it became impor- tant to stay alive as long as possible.

Two fingers of his right hand were inkstained.

It was exactly the kind of detail that might betray you.

Some nosing zealot in the Ministry (a woman, probably: someone like the little sandy-haired woman or the dark-haired girl from the Fiction Department) might start wondering why he had been writing during the lunch interval, why he had used an old- fashioned pen, WHAT he had been writing- and then drop a hint in the appropriate quarter.

He went to the bathroom and carefully scrubbed the ink away with the gritty dark-brown soap which rasped your skin like sandpaper and was therefore well adapted for this purpose.

He put the diary away in the drawer.

It was quite useless to think of hiding it, but he could at least make sure whether or not its existence had been discovered.

A hair laid across the page-ends was too obvious.

With the tip of his finger he picked up an iden- tifiable grain of whitish dust and deposited it on the corner of the cover, where it was bound to be shaken off if the book was moved.

Winston was dreaming of his mother.

He must, he thought, have been ten or eleven years old when his mother had disappeared.

She was a tall, statuesque, rather silent woman with slow movements and magnificent fair hair.

His father he remembered more vaguely as dark and thin, dressed always in neat dark clothes (Winston remembered especially the very thin soles of his father's shoes) and wearing spectacles.

The two of them must evidently have been swallowed up in one of the first great purges of the fifties.

At this moment his mother was sitting in some place deep down beneath him, with his young sister in her arms.

He did not remember his sister at all, except as a tiny, feeble baby, always silent, with large, watchful eyes.

Both of them were looking up at him.

They were down in some subterranean place- the bottom of a well, for instance, or a very deep grave- but it was a place which, already far below him, was itself moving downwards.

They were in the saloon of a sinking ship, looking up at him through the darkening water.

There was still air in the saloon, they could still see him and he them, but all the while they were sinking down, down into the green waters which in another moment must hide them from sight for ever.

He was out in the light and air while they were being sucked down to death, and they were down there because he was up here.

He knew it and they knew it, and he could see the knowledge in their faces.

There was no reproach either in their faces or in their hearts, only the knowledge that they must die in order that he might remain alive, and that this was part of the unavoidable order of things.

He could not remember what had happened, but he knew in his dream that in some way the lives of his mother and his sister had been sacrificed to his own.

It was one of those dreams which, while retaining the characteristic dream scenery, are a continua- tion of one's intellectual life, and in which one becomes aware of facts and ideas which still seem new and valuable after one is awake.

The thing that now suddenly struck Winston was that his mother's death, nearly thirty years ago, had been tragic and sor- rowful in a way that was no longer possible.

Tragedy, he perceived, belonged to the ancient time, to a time when there was still privacy, love, and friendship, and when the members of a family stood by one another without needing to know the reason.

His mother's memory tore at his heart because she had died loving him, when he was too young and selfish to love her in return, and because somehow, he did not remember how, she had sacrificed herself to a conception of loyalty that was private and unalterable.

Such things, he saw, could not happen today.

Today there were fear, hatred, and pain, but no dignity of emotion, no deep or com- plex sorrows.

All this he seemed to see in the large eyes of his mother and his sister, looking up at him through the green water, hundreds of fathoms down and still sinking.

Suddenly he was standing on short springy turf, on a summer evening when the slanting rays of the sun gilded the ground.

The landscape that he was looking at recurred so often in his dreams that he was never fully certain whether or not he had seen it in the real world.

In his waking thoughts he called it the Golden Country.

It was an old, rabbit-bitten pasture, with a foot-track wandering across it and a molehill here and there.

In the ragged hedge on the opposite side of the field the boughs of the elm trees were swaying very faintly in the breeze, their leaves just stirring in dense masses like women's hair.

Somewhere near at hand, though out of sight, there was a clear, slow-moving stream where dace were swimming in the pools under the willow trees.

The girl with dark hair was coming towards them across the field.

With what seemed a single movement she tore off her clothes and flung them disdainfully aside.

Her body was white and smooth, but it aroused no desire in him, indeed he barely looked at it.

What overwhelmed him in that instant was admira- tion for the gesture with which she had thrown her clothes aside.

With its grace and carelessness it seemed to annihilate a whole culture, a whole system of thought, as though Big Brother and the Party and the Thought Police could all be swept into nothingness by a single splendid movement of the arm.

That too was a gesture belonging to the ancient time.

Winston woke up with the word 'Shakespeare' on his lips.

The telescreen was giving forth an ear-splitting whistle which continued on the same note for thirty seconds.

It was nought seven fifteen, getting-up time for office workers.

Winston wrenched his body out of bed- naked, for a member of the Outer Party received only 3,000 clothing coupons annually, and a suit of pyjamas was 600- and seized a dingy singlet and a pair of shorts that were lying across a chair.

The Physical Jerks would begin in three minutes.

The next moment he was doubled up by a violent coughing fit which nearly always attacked him soon after waking up.

It emptied his lungs so completely that he could only begin breathing again by lying on his back and taking a series of deep gasps.

His veins had swelled with the effort of the cough, and the varicose ulcer had started itching.

'Thirty to forty group!' yapped a piercing female voice.

'Thirty to forty group!

Take your places, please.

Thirties to forties!' Winston sprang to attention in front of the telescreen, upon which the image of a youngish woman, scrawny but muscular, dressed in tunic and gym-shoes, had already appeared.

'Arms bending and stretching!' she rapped out.

'Take your time by me.

ONE, two, three, four!

ONE, two, three, four!

Come on, comrades, put a bit of life into it!

ONE, two, three four!

ONE two, three, four!...' The pain of the coughing fit had not quite driven out of Winston's mind the impression made by his dream, and the rhyth- mic movements of the exercise restored it somewhat.

As he mechanically shot his arms back and forth, wearing on his face the look of grim enjoyment which was considered proper during the Physical Jerks, he was struggling to think his way backward into the dim period of his early childhood.

It was extraordinarily difficult.

Beyond the late fifties everything faded.

When there were no external records that you could refer to, even the outline of your own life lost its sharpness.

You remembered huge events which had quite probably not happened, you remembered the detail of incidents without being able to recapture their atmos- phere, and there were long blank periods to which you could assign nothing.

Everything had been different then.

Even the names of countries, and their shapes on the map, had been differ- ent.

Airstrip One, for instance, had not been so called in those days: it had been called England or Britain, though London, he felt fairly certain, had always been called London.

Winston could not definitely remember a time when his coun- try had not been at war, but it was evident that there had been a fairly long interval of peace during his childhood, because one of his early memories was of an air raid which appeared to take everyone by surprise.

Perhaps it was the time when the atomic bomb had fallen on Colchester.

He did not remember the raid itself, but he did remember his father's hand clutching his own as they hurried down, down, down into some place deep in the earth, round and round a spiral staircase which rang under his feet and which finally so wearied his legs that he began whimper- ing and they had to stop and rest.

His mother, in her slow, dreamy way, was following a long way behind them.

She was carrying his baby sister- or perhaps it was only a bundle of blankets that she was carrying: he was not certain whether his sister had been born then.

Finally they had emerged into a noisy, crowded place which he had realized to be a Tube station.

There were people sitting all over the stone-flagged floor, and other people, packed tightly together, were sitting on metal bunks, one above the other.

Winston and his mother and father found themselves a place on the floor, and near them an old man and an old woman were sitting side by side on a bunk.

The old man had on a decent dark suit and a black cloth cap pushed back from very white hair: his face was scarlet and his eyes were blue and full of tears.

He reeked of gin.

It seemed to breathe out of his skin in place of sweat, and one could have fancied that the tears welling from his eyes were pure gin.

But though slightly drunk he was also suffering under some grief that was genuine and unbearable.

In his childish way Winston grasped that some terrible thing, some- thing that was beyond forgiveness and could never be remedied, had just happened.

It also seemed to him that he knew what it was.

Someone whom the old man loved- a little granddaughter, perhaps- had been killed.

Every few minutes the old man kept repeating: 'We didn't ought to 'ave trusted 'em.

I said so, Ma, didn't I?

That's what comes of trusting 'em.

I said so all along.

We didn't ought to 'ave trusted the buggers.' But which buggers they didn't ought to have trusted Winston could not now remember.

Since about that time, war had been literally continuous, though strictly speaking it had not always been the same war.

For several months during his childhood there had been confused street fighting in London itself, some of which he remembered vividly.

But to trace out the history of the whole period, to say who was fighting whom at any given moment, would have been utterly impossible, since no written record, and no spoken word, ever made mention of any other alignment than the existing one.

At this moment, for example, in 1984 (if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia and in alliance with Eastasia.

In no public or private utterance was it ever admitted that the three powers had at any time been grouped along different lines.

Actually, as Winston well knew, it was only four years since Oceania had been at war with Eastasia and in alliance with Eurasia.

But that was merely a piece of furtive knowledge which he happened to possess because his memory was not satisfactorily under control.

Officially the change of partners had never happened.

Oceania was at war with Eurasia: therefore Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia.

The enemy of the moment always represented absolute evil, and it followed that any past or future agreement with him was impossible.

The frightening thing, he reflected for the ten thousandth time as he forced his shoulders painfully backward (with hands on hips, they were gyrating their bodies from the waist, an exercise that was supposed to be good for the back muscles)- the fright- ening thing was that it might all be true.

If the Party could thrust its hand into the past and say of this or that event, IT NEVER HAPPENED- that, surely, was more terrifying than mere torture and death?

The Party said that Oceania had never been in alliance with Eurasia.

He, Winston Smith, knew that Oceania had been in alliance with Eurasia as short a time as four years ago.

But where did that knowledge exist?

Only in his own consciousness, which in any case must soon be annihilated.

And if all others accepted the lie which the Party imposed- if all records told the same tale- then the lie passed into history and became truth.

'Who controls the past,' ran the Party slogan, 'controls the future: who controls the present controls the past.' And yet the past, though of its nature alterable, never had been altered.

Whatever was true now was true from everlasting to everlasting.

It was quite simple.

All that was needed was an unending series of victories over your own memory.

'Reality control', they called it: in Newspeak, 'dou- blethink'.

'Stand easy!' barked the instructress, a little more genially.

Winston sank his arms to his sides and slowly refilled his lungs with air.

His mind slid away into the labyrinthine world of dou- blethink.

To know and not to know, to be conscious of complete truthfulness while telling carefully constructed lies, to hold simul- taneously two opinions which cancelled out, knowing them to be contradictory and believing in both of them, to use logic against logic, to repudiate morality while laying claim to it, to believe that democracy was impossible and that the Party was the guardian of democracy, to forget whatever it was necessary to forget, then to draw it back into memory again at the moment when it was needed, and then promptly to forget it again: and above all, to apply the same process to the process itself.

That was the ultimate subtlety: consciously to induce unconsciousness, and then, once again, to become unconscious of the act of hypnosis you had just performed.

Even to understand the word 'doublethink' involved the use of doublethink.

The instructress had called them to attention again.

'And now let's see which of us can touch our toes!' she said enthusiastically.

'Right over from the hips, please, comrades.

ONE-two!

ONE- two!...' Winston loathed this exercise, which sent shooting pains all the way from his heels to his buttocks and often ended by bringing on another coughing fit.

The half-pleasant quality went out of his meditations.

The past, he reflected, had not merely been altered, it had been actually destroyed.

For how could you establish even the most obvious fact when there existed no record outside your own memory?

He tried to remember in what year he had first heard mention of Big Brother.

He thought it must have been at some time in the sixties, but it was impossible to be certain.

In the Party histories, of course, Big Brother figured as the leader and guardian of the Revolution since its very earliest days.

His exploits had been gradually pushed backwards in time until already they extended into the fabulous world of the forties and the thirties, when the capitalists in their strange cylindrical hats still rode through the streets of London in great gleaming motor-cars or horse carriages with glass sides.

There was no knowing how much of this legend was true and how much invented.

Winston could not even remember at what date the Party itself had come into existence.

He did not believe he had ever heard the word Ingsoc before 1960, but it was possible that in its Oldspeak form- 'English Socialism', that is to say- it had been current earlier.

Everything melted into mist.

Sometimes, indeed, you could put your finger on a definite lie.

It was not true, for example, as was claimed in the Party history books, that the Party had invented aeroplanes.

He remembered aeroplanes since his earliest child- hood.

But you could prove nothing.

There was never any evidence.

Just once in his whole life he had held in his hands unmistakable documentary proof of the falsification of an histor- ical fact.

And on that occasion-- 'Smith!' screamed the shrewish voice from the telescreen.

'6079 Smith W.!

Yes, YOU!

Bend lower, please!

You can do better than that.

You're not trying.

Lower, please!

THAT'S better, comrade.

Now stand at ease, the whole squad, and watch me.' A sudden hot sweat had broken out all over Winston's body.

His face remained completely inscrutable.

Never show dismay!

Never show resentment!

A single flicker of the eyes could give you away.

He stood watching while the instructress raised her arms above her head and- one could not say gracefully, but with remarkable neatness and efficiency- bent over and tucked the first joint of her fingers under her toes.

'THERE, comrades!

THAT'S how I want to see you doing it.

Watch me again.

I'm thirty-nine and I've had four children.

Now look.' She bent over again.

'You see MY knees aren't bent.

You can all do it if you want to,' she added as she straightened herself up.

'Anyone under forty-five is perfectly capable of touching his toes.

We don't all have the privilege of fighting in the front line, but at least we can all keep fit.

Remember our boys on the Malabar front!

And the sailors in the Floating Fortresses!

Just think what THEY have to put up with.

Now try again.

That's better, comrade, that's MUCH better,' she added encouragingly as Winston, with a violent lunge, succeeded in touching his toes with knees unbent, for the first time in several years.

With the deep, unconscious sigh which not even the nearness of the telescreen could prevent him from uttering when his day's work started, Winston pulled the speakwrite towards him, blew the dust from its mouthpiece, and put on his spectacles.

Then he unrolled and clipped together four small cylinders of paper which had already flopped out of the pneumatic tube on the right-hand side of his desk.

In the walls of the cubicle there were three orifices.

To the right of the speakwrite, a small pneumatic tube for written messages, to the left, a larger one for newspapers; and in the side wall, within easy reach of Winston's arm, a large oblong slit protected by a wire grating.

This last was for the disposal of waste paper.

Similar slits existed in thousands or tens of thousands throughout the building, not only in every room but at short intervals in every corridor.

For some reason they were nicknamed memory holes.

When one knew that any document was due for destruction, or even when one saw a scrap of waste paper lying about, it was an automatic action to lift the flap of the nearest memory hole and drop it in, whereupon it would be whirled away on a current of warm air to the enormous furnaces which were hidden some- where in the recesses of the building.

Winston examined the four slips of paper which he had unrolled.

Each contained a message of only one or two lines, in the abbreviated jargon- not actually Newspeak, but consisting largely of Newspeak words- which was used in the Ministry for internal purposes.

They ran: times 17.3.84 bb speech malreported africa rectify times 19.12.83 forecasts 3 yp 4th quarter 83 misprints verify current issue times 14.2.84 miniplenty malquoted chocolate rectify times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite fullwise upsub antefiling With a faint feeling of satisfaction Winston laid the fourth mes- sage aside.

It was an intricate and responsible job and had better be dealt with last.

The other three were routine matters, though the second one would probably mean some tedious wading through lists of figures.

Winston dialled 'back numbers' on the telescreen and called for the appropriate issues of 'The Times', which slid out of the pneu- matic tube after only a few minutes' delay.

The messages he had received referred to articles or news items which for one reason or another it was thought necessary to alter, or, as the official phrase had it, to rectify.

For example, it appeared from 'The Times' of the seventeenth of March that Big Brother, in his speech of the previous day, had predicted that the South Indian front would remain quiet but that a Eurasian offensive would shortly be launched in North Africa.

As it happened, the Eurasian Higher Command had launched its offensive in South India and left North Africa alone.

It was therefore necessary to rewrite a para- graph of Big Brother's speech, in such a way as to make him predict the thing that had actually happened.

Or again, 'The Times' of the nineteenth of December had published the official forecasts of the output of various classes of consumption goods in the fourth quarter of 1983, which was also the sixth quarter of the Ninth Three-Year Plan.

Today's issue contained a statement of the actual output, from which it appeared that the forecasts were in every instance grossly wrong.

Winston's job was to rectify the original figures by making them agree with the later ones.

As for the third message, it referred to a very simple error which could be set right in a couple of minutes.

As short a time ago as February, the Ministry of Plenty had issued a promise (a 'categorical pledge' were the official words) that there would be no reduction of the chocolate ration during 1984.

Actually, as Winston was aware, the chocolate ration was to be reduced from thirty grammes to twenty at the end of the present week.

All that was needed was to substitute for the original promise a warning that it would prob- ably be necessary to reduce the ration at some time in April.

As soon as Winston had dealt with each of the messages, he clipped his speakwritten corrections to the appropriate copy of 'The Times' and pushed them into the pneumatic tube.

Then, with a movement which was as nearly as possible unconscious, he crumpled up the original message and any notes that he himself had made, and dropped them into the memory hole to be devoured by the flames.

What happened in the unseen labyrinth to which the pneumatic tubes led, he did not know in detail, but he did know in general terms.

As soon as all the corrections which happened to be neces- sary in any particular number of 'The Times' had been assembled and collated, that number would be reprinted, the original copy destroyed, and the corrected copy placed on the files in its stead.

This process of continuous alteration was applied not only to newspapers, but to books, periodicals, pamphlets, posters, leaflets, films, sound-tracks, cartoons, photographs- to every kind of literature or documentation which might conceivably hold any political or ideological significance.

Day by day and almost minute by minute the past was brought up to date.

In this way every prediction made by the Party could be shown by documen- tary evidence to have been correct, nor was any item of news, or any expression of opinion, which conflicted with the needs of the moment, ever allowed to remain on record.

All history was a palimpsest, scraped clean and reinscribed exactly as often as was necessary.

In no case would it have been possible, once the deed was done, to prove that any falsification had taken place.

The largest section of the Records Department, far larger than the one on which Winston worked, consisted simply of persons whose duty it was to track down and collect all copies of books, news- papers, and other documents which had been superseded and were due for destruction.

A number of 'The Times' which might, because of changes in political alignment, or mistaken prophecies uttered by Big Brother, have been rewritten a dozen times still stood on the files bearing its original date, and no other copy existed to contradict it.

Books, also, were recalled and rewritten again and again, and were invariably reissued without any admis- sion that any alteration had been made.

Even the written instructions which Winston received, and which he invariably got rid of as soon as he had dealt with them, never stated or implied that an act of forgery was to be committed: always the reference was to slips, errors, misprints, or misquotations which it was nec- essary to put right in the interests of accuracy.

But actually, he thought as he re-adjusted the Ministry of Plenty's figures, it was not even forgery.

It was merely the substi- tution of one piece of nonsense for another.

Most of the material that you were dealing with had no connexion with anything in the real world, not even the kind of connexion that is contained in a direct lie.

Statistics were just as much a fantasy in their original version as in their rectified version.

A great deal of the time you were expected to make them up out of your head.

For example, the Ministry of Plenty's forecast had estimated the output of boots for the quarter at 145 million pairs.

The actual output was given as sixty-two millions.

Winston, however, in rewriting the forecast, marked the figure down to fifty-seven millions, so as to allow for the usual claim that the quota had been overfulfilled.

In any case, sixty-two millions was no nearer the truth than fifty-seven mil- lions, or than 145 millions.

Very likely no boots had been produced at all.

Likelier still, nobody knew how many had been produced, much less cared.

All one knew was that every quarter astronomical numbers of boots were produced on paper, while perhaps half the population of Oceania went barefoot.

And so it was with every class of recorded fact, great or small.

Everything faded away into a shadow-world in which, finally, even the date of the year had become uncertain.

Winston glanced across the hall.

In the corresponding cubicle on the other side a small, precise-looking, dark-chinned man named Tillotson was working steadily away, with a folded news- paper on his knee and his mouth very close to the mouthpiece of the speakwrite.

He had the air of trying to keep what he was saying a secret between himself and the telescreen.

He looked up, and his spectacles darted a hostile flash in Winston's direction.

Winston hardly knew Tillotson, and had no idea what work he was employed on.

People in the Records Department did not readily talk about their jobs.

In the long, windowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and its endless rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwrites, there were quite a dozen people whom Winston did not even know by name, though he daily saw them hurrying to and fro in the corridors or gesticulat- ing in the Two Minutes Hate.

He knew that in the cubicle next to him the little woman with sandy hair toiled day in day out, simply at tracking down and deleting from the Press the names of people who had been vaporized and were therefore considered never to have existed.

There was a certain fitness in this, since her own hus- band had been vaporized a couple of years earlier.

And a few cubicles away a mild, ineffectual, dreamy creature named Ampleforth, with very hairy ears and a surprising talent for jug- gling with rhymes and metres, was engaged in producing garbled versions- definitive texts, they were called- of poems which had become ideologically offensive, but which for one reason or another were to be retained in the anthologies.

And this hall, with its fifty workers or thereabouts, was only one sub-section, a single cell, as it were, in the huge complexity of the Records Department.

Beyond, above, below, were other swarms of work- ers engaged in an unimaginable multitude of jobs.

There were the huge printing-shops with their sub-editors, their typography experts, and their elaborately equipped studios for the faking of photographs.

There was the tele-programmes section with its engineers, its producers, and its teams of actors specially chosen for their skill in imitating voices.

There were the armies of refer- ence clerks whose job was simply to draw up lists of books and periodicals which were due for recall.

There were the vast reposi- tories where the corrected documents were stored, and the hidden furnaces where the original copies were destroyed.

And some- where or other, quite anonymous, there were the directing brains who co-ordinated the whole effort and laid down the lines of policy which made it necessary that this fragment of the past should be preserved, that one falsified, and the other rubbed out of existence.

And the Records Department, after all, was itself only a single branch of the Ministry of Truth, whose primary job was not to reconstruct the past but to supply the citizens of Oceania with newspapers, films, textbooks, telescreen programmes, plays, novels- with every conceivable kind of information, instruction, or entertainment, from a statue to a slogan, from a lyric poem to a biological treatise, and from a child's spelling-book to a Newspeak dictionary.

And the Ministry had not only to supply the multifarious needs of the party, but also to repeat the whole operation at a lower level for the benefit of the proletariat.

There was a whole chain of separate departments dealing with proletar- ian literature, music, drama, and entertainment generally.

Here were produced rubbishy newspapers containing almost nothing except sport, crime and astrology, sensational five-cent novelettes, films oozing with sex, and sentimental songs which were com- posed entirely by mechanical means on a special kind of kaleidoscope known as a versificator.

There was even a whole sub-section- Pornosec, it was called in Newspeak- engaged in producing the lowest kind of pornography, which was sent out in sealed packets and which no Party member, other than those who worked on it, was permitted to look at.

Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston was working, but they were simple matters, and he had disposed of them before the Two Minutes Hate interrupted him.

When the Hate was over he returned to his cubicle, took the Newspeak dictionary from the shelf, pushed the speakwrite to one side, cleaned his spectacles, and settled down to his main job of the morning.

Winston's greatest pleasure in life was in his work.

Most of it was a tedious routine, but included in it there were also jobs so difficult and intricate that you could lose yourself in them as in the depths of a mathematical problem- delicate pieces of forgery in which you had nothing to guide you except your knowledge of the principles of Ingsoc and your estimate of what the Party wanted you to say.

Winston was good at this kind of thing.

On occasion he had even been entrusted with the rectification of 'The Times' leading articles, which were written entirely in Newspeak.

He unrolled the message that he had set aside earlier.

It ran: times 3.12.83 reporting bb dayorder doubleplusungood refs unpersons rewrite fullwise upsub antefiling In Oldspeak (or standard English) this might be rendered: The reporting of Big Brother's Order for the Day in 'The Times' of December 3rd 1983 is extremely unsatisfactory and makes references to non-existent persons.

Rewrite it in full and submit your draft to higher authority before filing.

Winston read through the offending article.

Big Brother's Order for the Day, it seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an organization known as FFCC, which supplied ciga- rettes and other comforts to the sailors in the Floating Fortresses.

A certain Comrade Withers, a prominent member of the Inner Party, had been singled out for special mention and awarded a decoration, the Order of Conspicuous Merit, Second Class.

Three months later FFCC had suddenly been dissolved with no reasons given.

One could assume that Withers and his associates were now in disgrace, but there had been no report of the matter in the Press or on the telescreen.

That was to be expected, since it was unusual for political offenders to be put on trial or even pub- licly denounced.

The great purges involving thousands of people, with public trials of traitors and thought-criminals who made abject confession of their crimes and were afterwards executed, were special show-pieces not occurring oftener than once in a couple of years.

More commonly, people who had incurred the displeasure of the Party simply disappeared and were never heard of again.

One never had the smallest clue as to what had hap- pened to them.

In some cases they might not even be dead.

Perhaps thirty people personally known to Winston, not counting his parents, had disappeared at one time or another.

Winston stroked his nose gently with a paper-clip.

In the cubi- cle across the way Comrade Tillotson was still crouching secretively over his speakwrite.

He raised his head for a moment: again the hostile spectacle-flash.

Winston wondered whether Comrade Tillotson was engaged on the same job as himself.

It was perfectly possible.

So tricky a piece of work would never be entrusted to a single person: on the other hand, to turn it over to a committee would be to admit openly that an act of fabrication was taking place.

Very likely as many as a dozen people were now working away on rival versions of what Big Brother had actually said.

And presently some master brain in the Inner Party would select this version or that, would re-edit it and set in motion the complex processes of cross-referencing that would be required, and then the chosen lie would pass into the permanent records and become truth.

Winston did not know why Withers had been disgraced.

Perhaps it was for corruption or incompetence.

Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid of a too-popular subordinate.

Perhaps Withers or someone close to him had been suspected of heretical tendencies.

Or perhaps- what was likeliest of all- the thing had simply happened because purges and vaporizations were a necessary part of the mechanics of government.

The only real clue lay in the words 'refs unpersons', which indicated that Withers was already dead.

You could not invariably assume this to be the case when people were arrested.

Sometimes they were released and allowed to remain at liberty for as much as a year or two years before being executed.

Very occasionally some person whom you had believed dead long since would make a ghostly reappearance at some public trial where he would implicate hun- dreds of others by his testimony before vanishing, this time for ever.

Withers, however, was already an UNPERSON.

He did not exist: he had never existed.

Winston decided that it would not be enough simply to reverse the tendency of Big Brother's speech.

It was better to make it deal with something totally unconnected with its original subject.

He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and thought-criminals, but that was a little too obvious, while to invent a victory at the front, or some triumph of over-production in the Ninth Three-Year Plan, might complicate the records too much.

What was needed was a piece of pure fantasy.

Suddenly there sprang into his mind, ready made as it were, the image of a certain Comrade Ogilvy, who had recently died in battle, in heroic circumstances.

There were occasions when Big Brother devoted his Order for the Day to commemorating some humble, rank-and- file Party member whose life and death he held up as an example worthy to be followed.

Today he should commemorate Comrade Ogilvy.

It was true that there was no such person as Comrade Ogilvy, but a few lines of print and a couple of faked photographs would soon bring him into existence.

Winston thought for a moment, then pulled the speakwrite towards him and began dictating in Big Brother's familiar style: a style at once military and pedantic, and, because of a trick of asking questions and then promptly answering them ('What les- sons do we learn from this fact, comrades?

The lesson- which is also one of the fundamental principles of Ingsoc- that,' etc., etc.), easy to imitate.

At the age of three Comrade Ogilvy had refused all toys except a drum, a sub-machine gun, and a model helicopter.

At six- a year early, by a special relaxation of the rules- he had joined the Spies, at nine he had been a troop leader.

At eleven he had denounced his uncle to the Thought Police after overhearing a conversation which appeared to him to have criminal tendencies.

At seventeen he had been a district organizer of the Junior Anti- Sex League.

At nineteen he had designed a hand-grenade which had been adopted by the Ministry of Peace and which, at its first trial, had killed thirty-one Eurasian prisoners in one burst.

At twenty-three he had perished in action.

Pursued by enemy jet planes while flying over the Indian Ocean with important despatches, he had weighted his body with his machine gun and leapt out of the helicopter into deep water, despatches and all- an end, said Big Brother, which it was impossible to contemplate without feelings of envy.

Big Brother added a few remarks on the purity and single-mindedness of Comrade Ogilvy's life.

He was a total abstainer and a nonsmoker, had no recreations except a daily hour in the gymnasium, and had taken a vow of celibacy, believ- ing marriage and the care of a family to be incompatible with a twenty-four-hour-a-day devotion to duty.

He had no subjects of conversation except the principles of Ingsoc, and no aim in life except the defeat of the Eurasian enemy and the hunting-down of spies, saboteurs, thought-criminals, and traitors generally.

Winston debated with himself whether to award Comrade Ogilvy the Order of Conspicuous Merit: in the end he decided against it because of the unnecessary cross-referencing that it would entail.

Once again he glanced at his rival in the opposite cubicle.

Something seemed to tell him with certainty that Tillotson was busy on the same job as himself.

There was no way of knowing whose job would finally be adopted, but he felt a profound con- viction that it would be his own.

Comrade Ogilvy, unimagined an hour ago, was now a fact.

It struck him as curious that you could create dead men but not living ones.

Comrade Ogilvy, who had never existed in the present, now existed in the past, and when once the act of forgery was forgotten, he would exist just as authentically, and upon the same evidence, as Charlemagne or Julius Caesar.

In the low-ceilinged canteen, deep underground, the lunch queue jerked slowly forward.

The room was already very full and deaf- eningly noisy.

From the grille at the counter the steam of stew came pouring forth, with a sour metallic smell which did not quite overcome the fumes of Victory Gin.

On the far side of the room there was a small bar, a mere hole in the wall, where gin could be bought at ten cents the large nip.

'Just the man I was looking for,' said a voice at Winston's back.

He turned round.

It was his friend Syme, who worked in the Research Department.

Perhaps 'friend' was not exactly the right word.

You did not have friends nowadays, you had comrades: but there were some comrades whose society was pleasanter than that of others.

Syme was a philologist, a specialist in Newspeak.

Indeed, he was one of the enormous team of experts now engaged in compiling the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary.

He was a tiny creature, smaller than Winston, with dark hair and large, protuberant eyes, at once mournful and derisive, which seemed to search your face closely while he was speaking to you.

'I wanted to ask you whether you'd got any razor blades,' he said.

'Not one!' said Winston with a sort of guilty haste.

'I've tried all over the place.

They don't exist any longer.' Everyone kept asking you for razor blades.

Actually he had two unused ones which he was hoarding up.

There had been a famine of them for months past.

At any given moment there was some necessary article which the Party shops were unable to supply.

Sometimes it was buttons, sometimes it was darning wool, some- times it was shoelaces; at present it was razor blades.

You could only get hold of them, if at all, by scrounging more or less furtively on the 'free' market.

'I've been using the same blade for six weeks,' he added untruthfully.

The queue gave another jerk forward.

As they halted he turned and faced Syme again.

Each of them took a greasy metal tray from a pile at the end of the counter.

'Did you go and see the prisoners hanged yesterday?' said Syme.

'I was working,' said Winston indifferently.

'I shall see it on the flicks, I suppose.' 'A very inadequate substitute,' said Syme.

His mocking eyes roved over Winston's face.

'I know you,' the eyes seemed to say, 'I see through you.

I know very well why you didn't go to see those prisoners hanged.' In an intellectual way, Syme was venomously orthodox.

He would talk with a disagree- able gloating satisfaction of helicopter raids on enemy villages, and trials and confessions of thought-criminals, the executions in the cellars of the Ministry of Love.

Talking to him was largely a matter of getting him away from such subjects and entangling him, if possible, in the technicalities of Newspeak, on which he was authoritative and interesting.

Winston turned his head a little aside to avoid the scrutiny of the large dark eyes.

'It was a good hanging,' said Syme reminiscently.

'I think it spoils it when they tie their feet together.

I like to see them kick- ing.

And above all, at the end, the tongue sticking right out, and blue- a quite bright blue.

That's the detail that appeals to me.' 'Nex', please!' yelled the white-aproned prole with the ladle.

Winston and Syme pushed their trays beneath the grille.

On to each was dumped swiftly the regulation lunch- a metal pannikin of pinkish-grey stew, a hunk of bread, a cube of cheese, a mug of milkless Victory Coffee, and one saccharine tablet.

'There's a table over there, under that telescreen,' said Syme.

'Let's pick up a gin on the way.' The gin was served out to them in handleless china mugs.

They threaded their way across the crowded room and unpacked their trays on to the metal-topped table, on one corner of which some- one had left a pool of stew, a filthy liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit.

Winston took up his mug of gin, paused for an instant to collect his nerve, and gulped the oily-tasting stuff down.

When he had winked the tears out of his eyes he suddenly discovered that he was hungry.

He began swallowing spoonfuls of the stew, which, in among its general sloppiness, had cubes of spongy pinkish stuff which was probably a preparation of meat.

Neither of them spoke again till they had emptied their pannikins.

From the table at Winston's left, a little behind his back, someone was talking rapidly and continuously, a harsh gabble almost like the quacking of a duck, which pierced the general uproar of the room.

'How is the Dictionary getting on?' said Winston, raising his voice to overcome the noise.

'Slowly,' said Syme.

'I'm on the adjectives.

It's fascinating.' He had brightened up immediately at the mention of Newspeak.

He pushed his pannikin aside, took up his hunk of bread in one delicate hand and his cheese in the other, and leaned across the table so as to be able to speak without shouting.

'The Eleventh Edition is the definitive edition,' he said.

'We're getting the language into its final shape- the shape it's going to have when nobody speaks anything else.

When we've finished with it, people like you will have to learn it all over again.

You think, I dare say, that our chief job is inventing new words.

But not a bit of it!

We're destroying words- scores of them, hundreds of them, every day.

We're cutting the language down to the bone.

The Eleventh Edition won't contain a single word that will become obsolete before the year 2050.' He bit hungrily into his bread and swallowed a couple of mouthfuls, then continued speaking, with a sort of pedant's pas- sion.

His thin dark face had become animated, his eyes had lost their mocking expression and grown almost dreamy.

'It's a beautiful thing, the destruction of words.

Of course the great wastage is in the verbs and adjectives, but there are hun- dreds of nouns that can be got rid of as well.

It isn't only the synonyms; there are also the antonyms.

After all, what justifica- tion is there for a word which is simply the opposite of some other word?

A word contains its opposite in itself.

Take "good", for instance.

If you have a word like "good", what need is there for a word like "bad"?

"Ungood"

will do just as well- better, because it's an exact opposite, which the other is not.

Or again, if you want a stronger version of "good", what sense is there in having a whole string of vague useless words like "excellent"

and "splen- did"

and all the rest of them?

"Plusgood"

covers the meaning, or "doubleplusgood"

if you want something stronger still.

Of course we use those forms already.

but in the final version of Newspeak there'll be nothing else.

In the end the whole notion of goodness and badness will be covered by only six words- in reality, only one word.

Don't you see the beauty of that, Winston?

It was B.B.'s idea originally, of course,' he added as an afterthought.

A sort of vapid eagerness flitted across Winston's face at the mention of Big Brother.

Nevertheless Syme immediately detected a certain lack of enthusiasm.

'You haven't a real appreciation of Newspeak, Winston,' he said almost sadly.

'Even when you write it you're still thinking in Oldspeak.

I've read some of those pieces that you write in "The Times"

occasionally.

They're good enough, but they're transla- tions.

In your heart you'd prefer to stick to Oldspeak, with all its vagueness and its useless shades of meaning.

You don't grasp the beauty of the destruction of words.

Do you know that Newspeak is the only language in the world whose vocabulary gets smaller every year?' Winston did know that, of course.

He smiled, sympathetically he hoped, not trusting himself to speak.

Syme bit off another frag- ment of the dark-coloured bread, chewed it briefly, and went on: 'Don't you see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of thought?

In the end we shall make thoughtcrime lit- erally impossible, because there will be no words in which to express it.

Every concept that can ever be needed, will be expressed by exactly one word, with its meaning rigidly defined and all its subsidiary meanings rubbed out and forgotten.

Already, in the Eleventh Edition, we're not far from that point.

But the process will still be continuing long after you and I are dead.

Every year fewer and fewer words, and the range of conscious- ness always a little smaller.

Even now, of course, there's no reason or excuse for committing thoughtcrime.

It's merely a question of self-discipline, reality-control.

But in the end there won't be any need even for that.

The Revolution will be complete when the lan- guage is perfect.

Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsoc is Newspeak,' he added with a sort of mystical satisfaction.

'Has it ever occurred to you, Winston, that by the year 2050, at the very latest, not a single human being will be alive who could understand such a conver- sation as we are having now?' 'Except--' began Winston doubtfully, and he stopped.

It had been on the tip of his tongue to say 'Except the proles,' but he checked himself, not feeling fully certain that this remark was not in some way unorthodox.

Syme, however, had divined what he was about to say.

'The proles are not human beings,' he said carelessly.

'By 2050- earlier, probably- all real knowledge of Oldspeak will have disappeared.

The whole literature of the past will have been destroyed.

Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Byron- they'll exist only in Newspeak versions, not merely changed into something different, but actually changed into something contradictory of what they used to be.

Even the literature of the Party will change.

Even the slogans will change.

How could you have a slogan like "freedom is slavery"

when the concept of freedom has been abol- ished?

The whole climate of thought will be different.

In fact there will be no thought, as we understand it now.

Orthodoxy means not thinking- not needing to think.

Orthodoxy is unconscious- ness.' One of these days, thought Winston with sudden deep convic- tion, Syme will be vaporized.

He is too intelligent.

He sees too clearly and speaks too plainly.

The Party does not like such people.

One day he will disappear.

It is written in his face.

Winston had finished his bread and cheese.

He turned a little sideways in his chair to drink his mug of coffee.

At the table on his left the man with the strident voice was still talking remorselessly away.

A young woman who was perhaps his secretary, and who was sitting with her back to Winston, was listening to him and seemed to be eagerly agreeing with everything that he said.

From time to time Winston caught some such remark as 'I think you're so right, I do so agree with you', uttered in a youthful and rather silly feminine voice.

But the other voice never stopped for an instant, even when the girl was speaking.

Winston knew the man by sight, though he knew no more about him than that he held some important post in the Fiction Department.

He was a man of about thirty, with a muscular throat and a large, mobile mouth.

His head was thrown back a little, and because of the angle at which he was sitting, his spectacles caught the light and presented to Winston two blank discs instead of eyes.

What was slightly horrible, was that from the stream of sound that poured out of his mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single word.

Just once Winston caught a phrase- 'complete and final elimina- tion of Goldsteinism'- jerked out very rapidly and, as it seemed, all in one piece, like a line of type cast solid.

For the rest it was just a noise, a quack-quack-quacking.

And yet, though you could not actually hear what the man was saying, you could not be in any doubt about its general nature.

He might be denouncing Goldstein and demanding sterner measures against thought-criminals and saboteurs, he might be fulminating against the atrocities of the Eurasian army, he might be praising Big Brother or the heroes on the Malabar front- it made no difference.

Whatever it was, you could be certain that every word of it was pure orthodoxy, pure Ingsoc.

As he watched the eyeless face with the jaw moving rap- idly up and down, Winston had a curious feeling that this was not a real human being but some kind of dummy.

It was not the man's brain that was speaking, it was his larynx.

The stuff that was coming out of him consisted of words, but it was not speech in the true sense: it was a noise uttered in unconsciousness, like the quacking of a duck.

Syme had fallen silent for a moment, and with the handle of his spoon was tracing patterns in the puddle of stew.

The voice from the other table quacked rapidly on, easily audible in spite of the surrounding din.

'There is a word in Newspeak,' said Syme, 'I don't know whether you know it: DUCKSPEAK, to quack like a duck.

It is one of those interesting words that have two contradictory mean- ings.

Applied to an opponent, it is abuse, applied to someone you agree with, it is praise.' Unquestionably Syme will be vaporized, Winston thought again.

He thought it with a kind of sadness, although well know- ing that Syme despised him and slightly disliked him, and was fully capable of denouncing him as a thought-criminal if he saw any reason for doing so.

There was something subtly wrong with Syme.

There was something that he lacked: discretion, aloofness, a sort of saving stupidity.

You could not say that he was unortho- dox.

He believed in the principles of Ingsoc, he venerated Big Brother, he rejoiced over victories, he hated heretics, not merely with sincerity but with a sort of restless zeal, an up-to-dateness of information, which the ordinary Party member did not approach.

Yet a faint air of disreputability always clung to him.

He said things that would have been better unsaid, he had read too many books, he frequented the Chestnut Tree Cafe, haunt of painters and musicians.

There was no law, not even an unwritten law, against frequenting the Chestnut Tree Cafe, yet the place was somehow ill-omened.

The old, discredited leaders of the Party had been used to gather there before they were finally purged.

Goldstein himself, it was said, had sometimes been seen there, years and decades ago.

Syme's fate was not difficult to foresee.

And yet it was a fact that if Syme grasped, even for three seconds, the nature of his, Winston's, secret opinions, he would betray him instantly to the Thought Police.

So would anybody else, for that matter: but Syme more than most.

Zeal was not enough.

Orthodoxy was unconsciousness.

Syme looked up.

'Here comes Parsons,' he said.

Something in the tone of his voice seemed to add, 'that bloody fool'.

Parsons, Winston's fellow-tenant at Victory Mansions, was in fact threading his way across the room- a tubby, middle-sized man with fair hair and a froglike face.

At thirty-five he was already putting on rolls of fat at neck and waistline, but his move- ments were brisk and boyish.

His whole appearance was that of a little boy grown large, so much so that although he was wearing the regulation overalls, it was almost impossible not to think of him as being dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirt, and red neck- erchief of the Spies.

In visualizing him one saw always a picture of dimpled knees and sleeves rolled back from pudgy forearms.

Parsons did, indeed, invariably revert to shorts when a community hike or any other physical activity gave him an excuse for doing so.

He greeted them both with a cheery 'Hullo, hullo!' and sat down at the table, giving off an intense smell of sweat.

Beads of moisture stood out all over his pink face.

His powers of sweating were extraordinary.

At the Community Centre you could always tell when he had been playing table-tennis by the dampness of the bat handle.

Syme had produced a strip of paper on which there was a long column of words, and was studying it with an ink- pencil between his fingers.

'Look at him working away in the lunch hour,' said Parsons, nudging Winston.

'Keenness, eh?

What's that you've got there, old boy?

Something a bit too brainy for me, I expect.

Smith, old boy, I'll tell you why I'm chasing you.

It's that sub you forgot to give me.' 'Which sub is that?' said Winston, automatically feeling for money.

About a quarter of one's salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptions, which were so numerous that it was dif- ficult to keep track of them.

'For Hate Week.

You know- the house-by-house fund.

I'm treasurer for our block.

We're making an all-out effort- going to put on a tremendous show.

I tell you, it won't be my fault if old Victory Mansions doesn't have the biggest outfit of flags in the whole street.

Two dollars you promised me.' Winston found and handed over two creased and filthy notes, which Parsons entered in a small notebook, in the neat handwrit- ing of the illiterate.

'By the way, old boy,' he said.

'I hear that little beggar of mine let fly at you with his catapult yesterday.

I gave him a good dress- ing-down for it.

In fact I told him I'd take the catapult away if he does it again.' 'I think he was a little upset at not going to the execution,' said Winston.

'Ah, well- what I mean to say, shows the right spirit, doesn't it?

Mischievous little beggars they are, both of them, but talk about keenness!

All they think about is the Spies, and the war, of course.

D'you know what that little girl of mine did last Saturday, when her troop was on a hike out Berkhamsted way?

She got two other girls to go with her, slipped off from the hike, and spent the whole afternoon following a strange man.

They kept on his tail for two hours, right through the woods, and then, when they got into Amersham, handed him over to the patrols.' 'What did they do that for?' said Winston, somewhat taken aback.

Parsons went on triumphantly: 'My kid made sure he was some kind of enemy agent- might have been dropped by parachute, for instance.

But here's the point, old boy.

What do you think put her on to him in the first place?

She spotted he was wearing a funny kind of shoes- said she'd never seen anyone wearing shoes like that before.

So the chances were he was a foreigner.

Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh?' 'What happened to the man?' said Winston.

'Ah, that I couldn't say, of course.

But I wouldn't be altogether surprised if--' Parsons made the motion of aiming a rifle, and clicked his tongue for the explosion.

'Good,' said Syme abstractedly, without looking up from his strip of paper.

'Of course we can't afford to take chances,' agreed Winston dutifully.

'What I mean to say, there is a war on,' said Parsons.

As though in confirmation of this, a trumpet call floated from the telescreen just above their heads.

However, it was not the proclamation of a military victory this time, but merely an announcement from the Ministry of Plenty.

'Comrades!' cried an eager youthful voice.

'Attention, com- rades!

We have glorious news for you.

We have won the battle for production!

Returns now completed of the output of all classes of consumption goods show that the standard of living has risen by no less than 20 per cent over the past year.

All over Oceania this morning there were irrepressible spontaneous demonstrations when workers marched out of factories and offices and paraded through the streets with banners voicing their gratitude to Big Brother for the new, happy life which his wise leadership has bestowed upon us.

Here are some of the completed figures.

Foodstuffs--' The phrase 'our new, happy life' recurred several times.

It had been a favourite of late with the Ministry of Plenty.

Parsons, his attention caught by the trumpet call, sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity, a sort of edified boredom.

He could not follow the figures, but he was aware that they were in some way a cause for satisfaction.

He had lugged out a huge and filthy pipe which was already half full of charred tobacco.

With the tobacco ration at 100 grammes a week it was seldom possible to fill a pipe to the top.

Winston was smoking a Victory Cigarette which he held care- fully horizontal.

The new ration did not start till tomorrow and he had only four cigarettes left.

For the moment he had shut his ears to the remoter noises and was listening to the stuff that streamed out of the telescreen.

It appeared that there had even been demon- strations to thank Big Brother for raising the chocolate ration to twenty grammes a week.

And only yesterday, he reflected, it had been announced that the ration was to be REDUCED to twenty grammes a week.

Was it possible that they could swallow that, after only twenty-four hours?

Yes, they swallowed it.

Parsons swallowed it easily, with the stupidity of an animal.

The eyeless creature at the other table swallowed it fanatically, passionately, with a furious desire to track down, denounce, and vaporize anyone who should suggest that last week the ration had been thirty grammes.

Syme, too- in some more complex way, involv- ing doublethink, Syme swallowed it.

Was he, then, ALONE in the possession of a memory?

The fabulous statistics continued to pour out of the telescreen.

As compared with last year there was more food, more clothes, more houses, more furniture, more cooking-pots, more fuel, more ships, more helicopters, more books, more babies- more of everything except disease, crime, and insanity.

Year by year and minute by minute, everybody and everything was whizzing rap- idly upwards.

As Syme had done earlier Winston had taken up his spoon and was dabbling in the pale-coloured gravy that dribbled across the table, drawing a long streak of it out into a pattern.

He meditated resentfully on the physical texture of life.

Had it always been like this?

Had food always tasted like this?

He looked round the canteen.

A low-ceilinged, crowded room, its walls grimy from the contact of innumerable bodies; battered metal tables and chairs, placed so close together that you sat with elbows touching; bent spoons, dented trays, coarse white mugs; all surfaces greasy, grime in every crack; and a sourish, composite smell of bad gin and bad coffee and metallic stew and dirty clothes.

Always in your stomach and in your skin there was a sort of protest, a feeling that you had been cheated of something that you had a right to.

It was true that he had no memories of anything greatly different.

In any time that he could accurately remember, there had never been quite enough to eat, one had never had socks or underclothes that were not full of holes, furniture had always been battered and rickety, rooms underheated, tube trains crowded, houses falling to pieces, bread dark-coloured, tea a rarity, coffee filthy-tasting, cigarettes insufficient- nothing cheap and plentiful except syn- thetic gin.

And though, of course, it grew worse as one's body aged, was it not a sign that this was NOT the natural order of things, if one's heart sickened at the discomfort and dirt and scarcity, the interminable winters, the stickiness of one's socks, the lifts that never worked, the cold water, the gritty soap, the ciga- rettes that came to pieces, the food with its strange evil tastes?

Why should one feel it to be intolerable unless one had some kind of ancestral memory that things had once been different?

He looked round the canteen again.

Nearly everyone was ugly, and would still have been ugly even if dressed otherwise than in the uniform blue overalls.

On the far side of the room, sitting at a table alone, a small, curiously beetle-like man was drinking a cup of coffee, his little eyes darting suspicious glances from side to side.

How easy it was, thought Winston, if you did not look about you, to believe that the physical type set up by the Party as an ideal- tall muscular youths and deep-bosomed maidens, blond- haired, vital, sunburnt, carefree- existed and even predominated.

Actually, so far as he could judge, the majority of people in Airstrip One were small, dark, and ill-favoured.

It was curious how that beetle-like type proliferated in the Ministries: little dumpy men, growing stout very early in life, with short legs, swift scuttling movements, and fat inscrutable faces with very small eyes.

It was the type that seemed to flourish best under the domin- ion of the Party.

The announcement from the Ministry of Plenty ended on another trumpet call and gave way to tinny music.

Parsons, stirred to vague enthusiasm by the bombardment of figures, took his pipe out of his mouth.

'The Ministry of Plenty's certainly done a good job this year,' he said with a knowing shake of his head.

'By the way, Smith old boy, I suppose you haven't got any razor blades you can let me have?' 'Not one,' said Winston.

'I've been using the same blade for six weeks myself.' 'Ah, well- just thought I'd ask you, old boy.' 'Sorry,' said Winston.

The quacking voice from the next table, temporarily silenced during the Ministry's announcement, had started up again, as loud as ever.

For some reason Winston suddenly found himself thinking of Mrs Parsons, with her wispy hair and the dust in the creases of her face.

Within two years those children would be denouncing her to the Thought Police.

Mrs Parsons would be vaporized.

Syme would be vaporized.

Winston would be vapor- ized.

O'Brien would be vaporized.

Parsons, on the other hand, would never be vaporized.

The eyeless creature with the quacking voice would never be vaporized.

The little beetle-like men who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthine corridors of Ministries they, too, would never be vaporized.

And the girl with dark hair, the girl from the Fiction Department- she would never be vapor- ized either.

It seemed to him that he knew instinctively who would survive and who would perish: though just what it was that made for survival, it was not easy to say.

At this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent jerk.

The girl at the next table had turned partly round and was looking at him.

It was the girl with dark hair.

She was looking at him in a sidelong way, but with curious intensity.

The instant she caught his eye she looked away again.

The sweat started out on Winston's backbone.

A horrible pang of terror went through him.

It was gone almost at once, but it left a sort of nagging uneasiness behind.

Why was she watching him?

Why did she keep following him about?

Unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already been at the table when he arrived, or had come there afterwards.

But yesterday, at any rate, during the Two Minutes Hate, she had sat immediately behind him when there was no apparent need to do so.

Quite likely her real object had been to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly enough.

His earlier thought returned to him: probably she was not actu- ally a member of the Thought Police, but then it was precisely the amateur spy who was the greatest danger of all.

He did not know how long she had been looking at him, but perhaps for as much as five minutes, and it was possible that his features had not been perfectly under control.

It was terribly dangerous to let your thoughts wander when you were in any public place or within range of a telescreen.

The smallest thing could give you away.

A nervous tic, an unconscious look of anxiety, a habit of muttering to yourself- anything that carried with it the suggestion of abnormality, of having something to hide.

In any case, to wear an improper expression on your face (to look incredulous when a victory was announced, for example) was itself a punishable offence.

There was even a word for it in Newspeak: FACE- CRIME, it was called.

The girl had turned her back on him again.

Perhaps after all she was not really following him about, perhaps it was coinci- dence that she had sat so close to him two days running.

His cigarette had gone out, and he laid it carefully on the edge of the table.

He would finish smoking it after work, if he could keep the tobacco in it.

Quite likely the person at the next table was a spy of the Thought Police, and quite likely he would be in the cellars of the Ministry of Love within three days, but a cigarette end must not be wasted.

Syme had folded up his strip of paper and stowed it away in his pocket.

Parsons had begun talking again.

'Did I ever tell you, old boy,' he said, chuckling round the stem of his pipe, 'about the time when those two nippers of mine set fire to the old market-woman's skirt because they saw her wrap- ping up sausages in a poster of B.B.?

Sneaked up behind her and set fire to it with a box of matches.

Burned her quite badly, I believe.

Little beggars, eh?

But keen as mustard!

That's a first-rate training they give them in the Spies nowadays- better than in my day, even.

What d'you think's the latest thing they've served them out with?

Ear trumpets for listening through keyholes!

My little girl brought one home the other night- tried it out on our sit- ting-room door, and reckoned she could hear twice as much as with her ear to the hole.

Of course it's only a toy, mind you.

Still, gives 'em the right idea, eh?' At this moment the telescreen let out a piercing whistle.

It was the signal to return to work.

All three men sprang to their feet to join in the struggle round the lifts, and the remaining tobacco fell out of Winston's cigarette.

Winston was writing in his diary: It was three years ago.

It was on a dark evening, in a narrow side-street near one of the big railway stations.

She was standing near a doorway in the wall, under a street lamp that hardly gave any light.

She had a young face, painted very thick.

It was really the paint that appealed to me, the whiteness of it, like a mask, and the bright red lips.

Party women never paint their faces.

There was nobody else in the street, and no telescreens.

She said two dollars.

I-- For the moment it was too difficult to go on.

He shut his eyes and pressed his fingers against them, trying to squeeze out the vision that kept recurring.

He had an almost overwhelming temptation to shout a string of filthy words at the top of his voice.

Or to bang his head against the wall, to kick over the table, and hurl the inkpot through the window- to do any violent or noisy or painful thing that might black out the memory that was torment- ing him.

Your worst enemy, he reflected, was your own nervous system.

At any moment the tension inside you was liable to translate itself into some visible symptom.

He thought of a man whom he had passed in the street a few weeks back; a quite ordinary-looking man, a Party member, aged thirty-five to forty, tallish and thin, carrying a brief-case.

They were a few metres apart when the left side of the man's face was suddenly contorted by a sort of spasm.

It happened again just as they were passing one another: it was only a twitch, a quiver, rapid as the clicking of a camera shutter, but obviously habitual.

He remembered thinking at the time: That poor devil is done for.

And what was frightening was that the action was quite possibly unconscious.

The most deadly danger of all was talking in your sleep.

There was no way of guarding against that, so far as he could see.

He drew his breath and went on writing: I went with her through the doorway and across a backyard into a basement kitchen.

There was a bed against the wall, and a lamp on the table, turned down very low.

She-- His teeth were set on edge.

He would have liked to spit.

Simultaneously with the woman in the basement kitchen he thought of Katharine, his wife.

Winston was married- had been married, at any rate: probably he still was married, so far as he knew his wife was not dead.

He seemed to breathe again the warm stuffy odour of the basement kitchen, an odour com- pounded of bugs and dirty clothes and villainous cheap scent, but nevertheless alluring, because no woman of the Party ever used scent, or could be imagined as doing so.

Only the proles used scent.

In his mind the smell of it was inextricably mixed up with fornication.

When he had gone with that woman it had been his first lapse in two years or thereabouts.

Consorting with prostitutes was for- bidden, of course, but it was one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself to break.

It was dangerous, but it was not a life-and-death matter.

To be caught with a prostitute might mean five years in a forced-labour camp: not more, if you had committed no other offence.

And it was easy enough, provided that you could avoid being caught in the act.

The poorer quarters swarmed with women who were ready to sell themselves.

Some could even be purchased for a bottle of gin, which the proles were not supposed to drink.

Tacitly the Party was even inclined to encourage prostitution, as an outlet for instincts which could not be altogether suppressed.

Mere debauchery did not matter very much, so long as it was furtive and joyless and only involved the women of a submerged and despised class.

The unforgivable crime was promiscuity between Party members.

But- though this was one of the crimes that the accused in the great purges invari- ably confessed to- it was difficult to imagine any such thing actually happening.

The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from forming loyalties which it might not be able to con- trol.

Its real, undeclared purpose was to remove all pleasure from the sexual act.

Not love so much as eroticism was the enemy, inside marriage as well as outside it.

All marriages between Party members had to be approved by a committee appointed for the purpose, and- though the principle was never clearly stated- permission was always refused if the couple concerned gave the impression of being physically attracted to one another.

The only recognized purpose of marriage was to beget children for the serv- ice of the Party.

Sexual intercourse was to be looked on as a slightly disgusting minor operation, like having an enema.

This again was never put into plain words, but in an indirect way it was rubbed into every Party member from childhood onwards.

There were even organizations such as the Junior Anti-Sex League, which advocated complete celibacy for both sexes.

All children were to be begotten by artificial insemination (ARTSEM, it was called in Newspeak) and brought up in public institutions.

This, Winston was aware, was not meant altogether seriously, but somehow it fitted in with the general ideology of the Party.

The Party was trying to kill the sex instinct, or, if it could not be killed, then to distort it and dirty it.

He did not know why this was so, but it seemed natural that it should be so.

And as far as the women were concerned, the Party's efforts were largely successful.

He thought again of Katharine.

It must be nine, ten- nearly eleven years since they had parted.

It was curious how seldom he thought of her.

For days at a time he was capable of forgetting that he had ever been married.

They had only been together for about fifteen months.

The Party did not permit divorce, but it rather encouraged separation in cases where there were no chil- dren.

Katharine was a tall, fair-haired girl, very straight, with splen- did movements.

She had a bold, aquiline face, a face that one might have called noble until one discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothing behind it.

Very early in her married life he had decided- though perhaps it was only that he knew her more intimately than he knew most people- that she had without exception the most stupid, vulgar, empty mind that he had ever encountered.

She had not a thought in her head that was not a slogan, and there was no imbecility, absolutely none that she was not capable of swallowing if the Party handed it out to her.

'The human sound-track' he nicknamed her in his own mind.

Yet he could have endured living with her if it had not been for just one thing- sex.

As soon as he touched her she seemed to wince and stiffen.

To embrace her was like embracing a jointed wooden image.

And what was strange was that even when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that she was simultaneously pushing him away with all her strength.

The rigidity of her muscles man- aged to convey that impression.

She would lie there with shut eyes, neither resisting nor co-operating but SUBMITTING.

It was extraordinarily embarrassing, and, after a while, horrible.

But even then he could have borne living with her if it had been agreed that they should remain celibate.

But curiously enough it was Katharine who refused this.

They must, she said, produce a child if they could.

So the performance continued to happen, once a week quite regularly, whenever it was not impossible.

She even used to remind him of it in the morning, as something which had to be done that evening and which must not be forgotten.

She had two names for it.

One was 'making a baby', and the other was 'our duty to the Party' (yes, she had actually used that phrase).

Quite soon he grew to have a feeling of positive dread when the appointed day came round.

But luckily no child appeared, and in the end she agreed to give up trying, and soon afterwards they parted.

Winston sighed inaudibly.

He picked up his pen again and wrote: She threw herself down on the bed, and at once, without any kind of preliminary in the most coarse, horrible way you can imagine, pulled up her skirt.

I-- He saw himself standing there in the dim lamplight, with the smell of bugs and cheap scent in his nostrils, and in his heart a feeling of defeat and resentment which even at that moment was mixed up with the thought of Katharine's white body, frozen for ever by the hypnotic power of the Party.

Why did it always have to be like this?

Why could he not have a woman of his own instead of these filthy scuffles at intervals of years?

But a real love affair was an almost unthinkable event.

The women of the Party were all alike.

Chastity was as deep ingrained in them as Party loyalty.

By care- ful early conditioning, by games and cold water, by the rubbish that was dinned into them at school and in the Spies and the Youth League, by lectures, parades, songs, slogans, and martial music, the natural feeling had been driven out of them.

His reason told him that there must be exceptions, but his heart did not believe it.

They were all impregnable, as the Party intended that they should be.

And what he wanted, more even than to be loved, was to break down that wall of virtue, even if it were only once in his whole life.

The sexual act, successfully performed, was rebel- lion.

Desire was thoughtcrime.

Even to have awakened Katharine, if he could have achieved it, would have been like a seduction, although she was his wife.

But the rest of the story had got to be written down.

He wrote: I turned up the lamp.

When I saw her in the light-- After the darkness the feeble light of the paraffin lamp had seemed very bright.

For the first time he could see the woman properly.

He had taken a step towards her and then halted, full of lust and terror.

He was painfully conscious of the risk he had taken in coming here.

It was perfectly possible that the patrols would catch him on the way out: for that matter they might be waiting outside the door at this moment.

If he went away without even doing what he had come here to do-- !

It had got to be written down, it had got to be confessed.

What he had suddenly seen in the lamplight was that the woman was OLD.

The paint was plastered so thick on her face that it looked as though it might crack like a cardboard mask.

There were streaks of white in her hair; but the truly dreadful detail was that her mouth had fallen a little open, revealing nothing except a cav- ernous blackness.

She had no teeth at all.

He wrote hurriedly, in scrabbling handwriting: When I saw her in the light she was quite an old woman, fifty years old at least.

But I went ahead and did it just the same.

He pressed his fingers against his eyelids again.

He had written it down at last, but it made no difference.

The therapy had not worked.

The urge to shout filthy words at the top of his voice was as strong as ever.

'If there is hope,' wrote Winston, 'it lies in the proles.' If there was hope, it MUST lie in the proles, because only there in those swarming disregarded masses, 85 per cent of the popula- tion of Oceania, could the force to destroy the Party ever be generated.

The Party could not be overthrown from within.

Its enemies, if it had any enemies, had no way of coming together or even of identifying one another.

Even if the legendary Brotherhood existed, as just possibly it might, it was inconceiv- able that its members could ever assemble in larger numbers than twos and threes.

Rebellion meant a look in the eyes, an inflexion of the voice, at the most, an occasional whispered word.

But the proles, if only they could somehow become conscious of their own strength.

would have no need to conspire.

They needed only to rise up and shake themselves like a horse shaking off flies.

If they chose they could blow the Party to pieces tomorrow morn- ing.

Surely sooner or later it must occur to them to do it?

And yet--!

He remembered how once he had been walking down a crowded street when a tremendous shout of hundreds of voices women's voices- had burst from a side-street a little way ahead.

It was a great formidable cry of anger and despair, a deep, loud 'Oh-o-o-o-oh!' that went humming on like the reverberation of a bell.

His heart had leapt.

It's started!

he had thought.

A riot!

The proles are breaking loose at last!

When he had reached the spot it was to see a mob of two or three hundred women crowding round the stalls of a street market, with faces as tragic as though they had been the doomed passengers on a sinking ship.

But at this moment the general despair broke down into a multitude of indi- vidual quarrels.

It appeared that one of the stalls had been selling tin saucepans.

They were wretched, flimsy things, but cooking- pots of any kind were always difficult to get.

Now the supply had unexpectedly given out.

The successful women, bumped and jos- tled by the rest, were trying to make off with their saucepans while dozens of others clamoured round the stall, accusing the stall-keeper of favouritism and of having more saucepans some- where in reserve.

There was a fresh outburst of yells.

Two bloated women, one of them with her hair coming down, had got hold of the same saucepan and were trying to tear it out of one another's hands.

For a moment they were both tugging, and then the handle came off.

Winston watched them disgustedly.

And yet, just for a moment, what almost frightening power had sounded in that cry from only a few hundred throats!

Why was it that they could never shout like that about anything that mattered?

He wrote: Until they become conscious they will never rebel, and until after they have rebelled they cannot become conscious.

That, he reflected, might almost have been a transcription from one of the Party textbooks.

The Party claimed, of course, to have liberated the proles from bondage.

Before the Revolution they had been hideously oppressed by the capitalists, they had been starved and flogged, women had been forced to work in the coal mines (women still did work in the coal mines, as a matter of fact), chil- dren had been sold into the factories at the age of six.

But simultaneously, true to the Principles of doublethink, the Party taught that the proles were natural inferiors who must be kept in subjection, like animals, by the application of a few simple rules.

In reality very little was known about the proles.

It was not nec- essary to know much.

So long as they continued to work and breed, their other activities were without importance.

Left to themselves, like cattle turned loose upon the plains of Argentina, they had reverted to a style of life that appeared to be natural to them, a sort of ancestral pattern.

They were born, they grew up in the gutters, they went to work at twelve, they passed through a brief blossoming-period of beauty and sexual desire, they married at twenty, they were middle-aged at thirty, they died, for the most part, at sixty.

Heavy physical work, the care of home and chil- dren, petty quarrels with neighbours, films, football, beer, and above all, gambling, filled up the horizon of their minds.

To keep them in control was not difficult.

A few agents of the Thought Police moved always among them, spreading false rumours and marking down and eliminating the few individuals who were judged capable of becoming dangerous; but no attempt was made to indoctrinate them with the ideology of the Party.

It was not desirable that the proles should have strong political feelings.

All that was required of them was a primitive patriotism which could be appealed to whenever it was necessary to make them accept longer working-hours or shorter rations.

And even when they became discontented, as they sometimes did, their discontent led nowhere, because being without general ideas, they could only focus it on petty specific grievances.

The larger evils invariably escaped their notice.

The great majority of proles did not even have telescreens in their homes.

Even the civil police interfered with them very little.

There was a vast amount of criminality in London, a whole world-within-a-world of thieves, bandits, pros- titutes, drug-peddlers, and racketeers of every description; but since it all happened among the proles themselves, it was of no importance.

In all questions of morals they were allowed to follow their ancestral code.

The sexual puritanism of the Party was not imposed upon them.

Promiscuity went unpunished, divorce was permitted.

For that matter, even religious worship would have been permitted if the proles had shown any sign of needing or wanting it.

They were beneath suspicion.

As the Party slogan put it: 'Proles and animals are free.' Winston reached down and cautiously scratched his varicose ulcer.

It had begun itching again.

The thing you invariably came back to was the impossibility of knowing what life before the Revolution had really been like.

He took out of the drawer a copy of a children's history textbook which he had borrowed from Mrs Parsons, and began copying a passage into the diary: In the old days (it ran), before the glorious Revolution, London was not the beautiful city that we know today.

It was a dark, dirty, miserable place where hardly anybody had enough to eat and where hundreds and thousands of poor people had no boots on their feet and not even a roof to sleep under.

Children no older than you had to work twelve hours a day for cruel masters who flogged them with whips if they worked too slowly and fed them on nothing but stale breadcrusts and water.

But in among all this terrible poverty there were just a few great big beautiful houses that were lived in by rich men who had as many as thirty servants to look after them.

These rich men were called capitalists.

They were fat, ugly men with wicked faces, like the one in the picture on the opposite page.

You can see that he is dressed in a long black coat which was called a frock coat, and a queer, shiny hat shaped like a stovepipe, which was called a top hat.

This was the uniform of the capitalists, and no one else was allowed to wear it.

The capitalists owned everything in the world, and everyone else was their slave.

They owned all the land, all the houses, all the factories, and all the money.

If anyone disobeyed them they could throw them into prison, or they could take his job away and starve him to death.

When any ordinary person spoke to a capitalist he had to cringe and bow to him, and take off his cap and address him as 'Sir'.

The chief of all the capitalists was called the King, and-- But he knew the rest of the catalogue.

There would be mention of the bishops in their lawn sleeves, the judges in their ermine robes, the pillory, the stocks, the treadmill, the cat-o'-nine tails, the Lord Mayor's Banquet, and the practice of kissing the Pope's toe.

There was also something called the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, which would probably not be mentioned in a textbook for children.

It was the law by which every capitalist had the right to sleep with any woman working in one of his factories.

How could you tell how much of it was lies?

It MIGHT be true that the average human being was better off now than he had been before the Revolution.

The only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your own bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were intolerable and that at some other time they must have been different.

It struck him that the truly characteristic thing about modern life was not its cruelty and inse- curity, but simply its bareness, its dinginess, its listlessness.

Life, if you looked about you, bore no resemblance not only to the lies that streamed out of the telescreens, but even to the ideals that the Party was trying to achieve.

Great areas of it, even for a Party member, were neutral and non-political, a matter of slogging through dreary jobs, fighting for a place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, cadging a saccharine tablet, saving a cigarette end.

The ideal set up by the Party was something huge, terrible, and glittering- a world of steel and concrete, of monstrous machines and terrifying weapons- a nation of warriors and fanatics, marching forward in perfect unity, all thinking the same thoughts and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fighting, tri- umphing, persecuting- three hundred million people all with the same face.

The reality was decaying, dingy cities where underfed people shuffled to and fro in leaky shoes, in patched-up nine- teenth-century houses that smelt always of cabbage and bad lavatories.

He seemed to see a vision of London, vast and ruinous, city of a million dustbins, and mixed up with it was a picture of Mrs Parsons, a woman with lined face and wispy hair, fiddling helplessly with a blocked waste-pipe.

He reached down and scratched his ankle again.

Day and night the telescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people today had more food, more clothes, better houses, better recreations- that they lived longer, worked shorter hours, were bigger, healthier, stronger, happier, more intelligent, better edu- cated, than the people of fifty years ago.

Not a word of it could ever be proved or disproved.

The Party claimed, for example, that today 40 per cent of adult proles were literate: before the Revolution, it was said, the number had only been 15 per cent.

The Party claimed that the infant mortality rate was now only 160 per thousand, whereas before the Revolution it had been 300- and so it went on.

It was like a single equation with two unknowns.

It might very well be that literally every word in the history books, even the things that one accepted without question, was pure fantasy.

For all he knew there might never have been any such law as the JUS PRIMAE NOCTIS, or any such creature as a capitalist, or any such garment as a top hat.

Everything faded into mist.

The past was erased, the erasure was forgotten, the lie became truth.

Just once in his life he had possessed- AFTER the event: that was what counted- concrete, unmistakable evidence of an act of falsification.

He had held it between his fingers for as long as thirty seconds.

In 1973, it must have been- at any rate, it was at about the time when he and Katharine had parted.

But the really relevant date was seven or eight years earlier.

The story really began in the middle sixties, the period of the great purges in which the original leaders of the Revolution were wiped out once and for all.

By 1970 none of them was left, except Big Brother himself.

All the rest had by that time been exposed as traitors and counter-revolutionaries.

Goldstein had fled and was hiding no one knew where, and of the others, a few had simply disappeared, while the majority had been executed after spectac- ular public trials at which they made confession of their crimes.

Among the last survivors were three men named Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford.

It must have been in 1965 that these three had been arrested.

As often happened, they had vanished for a year or more, so that one did not know whether they were alive or dead, and then had suddenly been brought forth to incriminate them- selves in the usual way.

They had confessed to intelligence with the enemy (at that date, too, the enemy was Eurasia), embezzle- ment of public funds, the murder of various trusted Party members, intrigues against the leadership of Big Brother which had started long before the Revolution happened, and acts of sab- otage causing the death of hundreds of thousands of people.

After confessing to these things they had been pardoned, reinstated in the Party, and given posts which were in fact sinecures but which sounded important.

All three had written long, abject articles in 'The Times', analysing the reasons for their defection and promis- ing to make amends.

Some time after their release Winston had actually seen all three of them in the Chestnut Tree Cafe.

He remembered the sort of terrified fascination with which he had watched them out of the corner of his eye.

They were men far older than himself, relics of the ancient world, almost the last great figures left over from the heroic days of the Party.

The glamour of the underground struggle and the civil war still faintly clung to them.

He had the feeling, though already at that time facts and dates were growing blurry, that he had known their names years earlier than he had known that of Big Brother.

But also they were outlaws, enemies, untouchables, doomed with absolute certainty to extinction within a year or two.

No one who had once fallen into the hands of the Thought Police ever escaped in the end.

They were corpses waiting to be sent back to the grave.

There was no one at any of the tables nearest to them.

It was not wise even to be seen in the neighbourhood of such people.

They were sitting in silence before glasses of the gin flavoured with cloves which was the speciality of the cafe.

Of the three, it was Rutherford whose appearance had most impressed Winston.

Rutherford had once been a famous caricaturist, whose brutal cartoons had helped to inflame popular opinion before and during the Revolution.

Even now, at long intervals, his cartoons were appearing in The Times.

They were simply an imitation of his ear- lier manner, and curiously lifeless and unconvincing.

Always they were a rehashing of the ancient themes- slum tenements, starv- ing children, street battles, capitalists in top hats- even on the barricades the capitalists still seemed to cling to their top hats an endless, hopeless effort to get back into the past.

He was a mon- strous man, with a mane of greasy grey hair, his face pouched and seamed, with thick negroid lips.

At one time he must have been immensely strong; now his great body was sagging, sloping, bulging, falling away in every direction.

He seemed to be breaking up before one's eyes, like a mountain crumbling.

It was the lonely hour of fifteen.

Winston could not now remember how he had come to be in the cafe at such a time.

The place was almost empty.

A tinny music was trickling from the tele- screens.

The three men sat in their corner almost motionless, never speaking.

Uncommanded, the waiter brought fresh glasses of gin.

There was a chessboard on the table beside them, with the pieces set out but no game started.

And then, for perhaps half a minute in all, something happened to the telescreens.

The tune that they were playing changed, and the tone of the music changed too.

There came into it- but it was something hard to describe.

It was a peculiar, cracked, braying, jeering note: in his mind Winston called it a yellow note.

And then a voice from the telescreen was singing: Under the spreading chestnut tree I sold you and you sold me: There lie they, and here lie we Under the spreading chestnut tree.

The three men never stirred.

But when Winston glanced again at Rutherford's ruinous face, he saw that his eyes were full of tears.

And for the first time he noticed, with a kind of inward shudder, and yet not knowing AT WHAT he shuddered, that both Aaronson and Rutherford had broken noses.

A little later all three were re-arrested.

It appeared that they had engaged in fresh conspiracies from the very moment of their release.

At their second trial they confessed to all their old crimes over again, with a whole string of new ones.

They were executed, and their fate was recorded in the Party histories, a warning to posterity.

About five years after this, in 1973, Winston was unrolling a wad of documents which had just flopped out of the pneumatic tube on to his desk when he came on a fragment of paper which had evidently been slipped in among the others and then forgotten.

The instant he had flattened it out he saw its sig- nificance.

It was a half-page torn out of 'The Times' of about ten years earlier- the top half of the page, so that it included the date- and it contained a photograph of the delegates at some Party function in New York.

Prominent in the middle of the group were Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford.

There was no mistaking them, in any case their names were in the caption at the bottom.

The point was that at both trials all three men had confessed that on that date they had been on Eurasian soil.

They had flown from a secret airfield in Canada to a rendezvous somewhere in Siberia, and had conferred with members of the Eurasian General Staff, to whom they had betrayed important military secrets.

The date had stuck in Winston's memory because it chanced to be mid- summer day; but the whole story must be on record in countless other places as well.

There was only one possible conclusion: the confessions were lies.

Of course, this was not in itself a discovery.

Even at that time Winston had not imagined that the people who were wiped out in the purges had actually committed the crimes that they were accused of.

But this was concrete evidence; it was a fragment of the abolished past, like a fossil bone which turns up in the wrong stratum and destroys a geological theory.

It was enough to blow the Party to atoms, if in some way it could have been published to the world and its significance made known.

He had gone straight on working.

As soon as he saw what the photograph was, and what it meant, he had covered it up with another sheet of paper.

Luckily, when he unrolled it, it had been upside-down from the point of view of the telescreen.

He took his scribbling pad on his knee and pushed back his chair so as to get as far away from the telescreen as possible.

To keep your face expressionless was not difficult, and even your breathing could be controlled, with an effort: but you could not control the beating of your heart, and the telescreen was quite del- icate enough to pick it up.

He let what he judged to be ten minutes go by, tormented all the while by the fear that some accident- a sudden draught blowing across his desk, for instance- would betray him.

Then, without uncovering it again, he dropped the photograph into the memory hole, along with some other waste papers.

Within another minute, perhaps, it would have crumbled into ashes.

That was ten- eleven years ago.

Today, probably, he would have kept that photograph.

It was curious that the fact of having held it in his fingers seemed to him to make a difference even now, when the photograph itself, as well as the event it recorded, was only memory.

Was the Party's hold upon the past less strong, he wondered, because a piece of evidence which existed no longer HAD ONCE existed?

But today, supposing that it could be somehow resurrected from its ashes, the photograph might not even be evidence.

Already, at the time when he made his discovery, Oceania was no longer at war with Eurasia, and it must have been to the agents of Eastasia that the three dead men had betrayed their country.

Since then there had been other changes- two, three, he could not remember how many.

Very likely the confessions had been rewrit- ten and rewritten until the original facts and dates no longer had the smallest significance.

The past not only changed, but changed continuously.

What most afflicted him with the sense of nightmare was that he had never clearly understood why the huge imposture was undertaken.

The immediate advantages of falsifying the past were obvious, but the ultimate motive was mysterious.

He took up his pen again and wrote: I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY.

He wondered, as he had many times wondered before, whether he himself was a lunatic.

Perhaps a lunatic was simply a minority of one.

At one time it had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun; today, to believe that the past is unalterable.

He might be ALONE in holding that belief, and if alone, then a lunatic.

But the thought of being a lunatic did not greatly trouble him: the horror was that he might also be wrong.

He picked up the children's history book and looked at the por- trait of Big Brother which formed its frontispiece.

The hypnotic eyes gazed into his own.

It was as though some huge force were pressing down upon you- something that penetrated inside your skull, battering against your brain, frightening you out of your beliefs, persuading you, almost, to deny the evidence of your senses.

In the end the Party would announce that two and two made five, and you would have to believe it.

It was inevitable that they should make that claim sooner or later: the logic of their position demanded it.

Not merely the validity of experience, but the very existence of external reality, was tacitly denied by their philosophy.

The heresy of heresies was common sense.

And what was terrifying was not that they would kill you for thinking oth- erwise, but that they might be right.

For, after all, how do we know that two and two make four?

Or that the force of gravity works?

Or that the past is unchangeable?

If both the past and the external world exist only in the mind, and if the mind itself is con- trollable what then?

But no!

His courage seemed suddenly to stiffen of its own accord.

The face of O'Brien, not called up by any obvious associ- ation, had floated into his mind.

He knew, with more certainty than before, that O'Brien was on his side.

He was writing the diary for O'Brien- TO O'Brien: it was like an interminable letter which no one would ever read, but which was addressed to a par- ticular person and took its colour from that fact.

The Party told you to reject the evidence of your eyes and ears.

It was their final, most essential command.

His heart sank as he thought of the enormous power arrayed against him, the ease with which any Party intellectual would overthrow him in debate, the subtle arguments which he would not be able to understand, much less answer.

And yet he was in the right!

They were wrong and he was right.

The obvious, the silly, and the true had got to be defended.

Truisms are true, hold on to that!

The solid world exists, its laws do not change.

Stones are hard, water is wet, objects unsupported fall towards the earth's centre.

With the feel- ing that he was speaking to O'Brien, and also that he was setting forth an important axiom, he wrote: Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four.

If that is granted, all else follows.

From somewhere at the bottom of a passage the smell of roasting coffee- real coffee, not Victory Coffee- came floating out into the street.

Winston paused involuntarily.

For perhaps two seconds he was back in the half-forgotten world of his childhood.

Then a door banged, seeming to cut off the smell as abruptly as though it had been a sound.

He had walked several kilometres over pavements, and his vari- cose ulcer was throbbing.

This was the second time in three weeks that he had missed an evening at the Community Centre: a rash act, since you could be certain that the number of your atten- dances at the Centre was carefully checked.

In principle a Party member had no spare time, and was never alone except in bed.

It was assumed that when he was not working, eating, or sleeping he anything that suggested a taste for solitude, even to go for a walk by yourself, was always slightly dangerous.

There was a word for it in Newspeak: OWNLIFE, it was called, meaning individualism and eccentricity.

But this evening as he came out of the Ministry the balminess of the April air had tempted him.

The sky was a warmer blue than he had seen it that year, and suddenly the long, noisy evening at the Centre, the boring, exhausting games, the lec- tures, the creaking camaraderie oiled by gin, had seemed intolerable.

On impulse he had turned away from the bus-stop and wandered off into the labyrinth of London, first south, then east, then north again, losing himself among unknown streets and hardly bothering in which direction he was going.

'If there is hope,' he had written in the diary, 'it lies in the proles.' The words kept coming back to him, statement of a mys- tical truth and a palpable absurdity.

He was somewhere in the vague, brown-coloured slums to the north and east of what had once been Saint Pancras Station.

He was walking up a cobbled street of little two-storey houses with battered doorways which gave straight on the pavement and which were somehow curiously suggestive of ratholes.

There were puddles of filthy water here and there among the cobbles.

In and out of the dark doorways, and down narrow alley-ways that branched off on either side, people swarmed in astonishing numbers- girls in full bloom, with crudely lipsticked mouths, and youths who chased the girls, and swollen waddling women who showed you what the girls would be like in ten years' time, and old bent creatures shuffling along on splayed feet, and ragged barefooted children who played in the puddles and then scattered at angry yells from their mothers.

Perhaps a quarter of the windows in the street were broken and boarded up.

Most of the people paid no attention to Winston; a few eyed him with a sort of guarded curiosity.

Two monstrous women with brick-red forearms folded across their aprons were talking outside a doorway.

Winston caught scraps of conversation as he approached.

'"Yes,"

I says to 'er, "that's all very well,"

I says.

"But if you'd of been in my place you'd of done the same as what I done.

It's easy to criticize,"

I says, "but you ain't got the same problems as what I got."' 'Ah,' said the other, 'that's jest it.

That's jest where it is.' The strident voices stopped abruptly.

The women studied him in hostile silence as he went past.

But it was not hostility, exactly; merely a kind of wariness, a momentary stiffening, as at the pass- ing of some unfamiliar animal.

The blue overalls of the Party could not be a common sight in a street like this.

Indeed, it was unwise to be seen in such places, unless you had definite business there.

The patrols might stop you if you happened to run into them.

'May I see your papers, comrade?

What are you doing here?

What time did you leave work?

Is this your usual way home?'- and so on and so forth.

Not that there was any rule against walk- ing home by an unusual route: but it was enough to draw attention to you if the Thought Police heard about it.

Suddenly the whole street was in commotion.

There were yells of warning from all sides.

People were shooting into the doorways like rabbits.

A young woman leapt out of a doorway a little ahead of Winston, grabbed up a tiny child playing in a puddle, whipped her apron round it, and leapt back again, all in one movement.

At the same instant a man in a concertina-like black suit, who had emerged from a side alley, ran towards Winston, pointing excit- edly to the sky.

'Steamer!' he yelled.

'Look out, guv'nor!

Bang over'ead!

Lay down quick!' 'Steamer' was a nickname which, for some reason, the proles applied to rocket bombs.

Winston promptly flung himself on his face.

The proles were nearly always right when they gave you a warning of this kind.

They seemed to possess some kind of instinct which told them several seconds in advance when a rocket was coming, although the rockets supposedly travelled faster than sound.

Winston clasped his forearms above his head.

There was a roar that seemed to make the pavement heave; a shower of light objects pattered on to his back.

When he stood up he found that he was covered with fragments of glass from the nearest window.

He walked on.

The bomb had demolished a group of houses 200 metres up the street.

A black plume of smoke hung in the sky, and below it a cloud of plaster dust in which a crowd was already forming around the ruins.

There was a little pile of plaster lying on the pavement ahead of him, and in the middle of it he could see a bright red streak.

When he got up to it he saw that it was a human hand severed at the wrist.

Apart from the bloody stump, the hand was so completely whitened as to resemble a plaster cast.

He kicked the thing into the gutter, and then, to avoid the crowd, turned down a side-street to the right.

Within three or four minutes he was out of the area which the bomb had affected, and the sordid swarming life of the streets was going on as though nothing had happened.

It was nearly twenty hours, and the drink- ing-shops which the proles frequented ('pubs', they called them) were choked with customers.

From their grimy swing doors, end- lessly opening and shutting, there came forth a smell of urine, sawdust, and sour beer.

In an angle formed by a projecting house- front three men were standing very close together, the middle one of them holding a folded-up newspaper which the other two were studying over his shoulder.

Even before he was near enough to make out the expression on their faces, Winston could see absorp- tion in every line of their bodies.

It was obviously some serious piece of news that they were reading.

He was a few paces away from them when suddenly the group broke up and two of the men were in violent altercation.

For a moment they seemed almost on the point of blows.

'Can't you bleeding well listen to what I say?

I tell you no number ending in seven ain't won for over fourteen months!' 'Yes, it 'as, then!' 'No, it 'as not!

Back 'ome I got the 'ole lot of 'em for over two years wrote down on a piece of paper.

I takes 'em down reg'lar as the clock.

An' I tell you, no number ending in seven--' 'Yes, a seven 'AS won!

I could pretty near tell you the bleeding number.

Four oh seven, it ended in.

It were in February- second week in February.' 'February your grandmother!

I got it all down in black and white.

An' I tell you, no number--' 'Oh, pack it in!' said the third man.

They were talking about the Lottery.

Winston looked back when he had gone thirty metres.

They were still arguing, with vivid, passionate faces.

The Lottery, with its weekly pay-out of enormous prizes, was the one public event to which the proles paid serious attention.

It was probable that there were some mil- lions of proles for whom the Lottery was the principal if not the only reason for remaining alive.

It was their delight, their folly, their anodyne, their intellectual stimulant.

Where the Lottery was concerned, even people who could barely read and write seemed capable of intricate calculations and staggering feats of memory.

There was a whole tribe of men who made a living simply by sell- ing systems, forecasts, and lucky amulets.

Winston had nothing to do with the running of the Lottery, which was managed by the Ministry of Plenty, but he was aware (indeed everyone in the party was aware) that the prizes were largely imaginary.

Only small sums were actually paid out, the winners of the big prizes being non-existent persons.

In the absence of any real intercommunica- tion between one part of Oceania and another, this was not difficult to arrange.

But if there was hope, it lay in the proles.

You had to cling on to that.

When you put it in words it sounded reasonable: it was when you looked at the human beings passing you on the pave- ment that it became an act of faith.

The street into which he had turned ran downhill.

He had a feeling that he had been in this neighbourhood before, and that there was a main thoroughfare not far away.

From somewhere ahead there came a din of shout- ing voices.

The street took a sharp turn and then ended in a flight of steps which led down into a sunken alley where a few stall- keepers were selling tired-looking vegetables.

At this moment Winston remembered where he was.

The alley led out into the main street, and down the next turning, not five minutes away, was the junk-shop where he had bought the blank book which was now his diary.

And in a small stationer's shop not far away he had bought his penholder and his bottle of ink.

He paused for a moment at the top of the steps.

On the oppo- site side of the alley there was a dingy little pub whose windows appeared to be frosted over but in reality were merely coated with dust.

A very old man, bent but active, with white moustaches that bristled forward like those of a prawn, pushed open the swing door and went in.

As Winston stood watching, it occurred to him that the old man, who must be eighty at the least, had already been middle-aged when the Revolution happened.

He and a few others like him were the last links that now existed with the van- ished world of capitalism.

In the Party itself there were not many people left whose ideas had been formed before the Revolution.

The older generation had mostly been wiped out in the great purges of the fifties and sixties, and the few who survived had long ago been terrified into complete intellectual surrender.

If there was any one still alive who could give you a truthful account of con- ditions in the early part of the century, it could only be a prole.

Suddenly the passage from the history book that he had copied into his diary came back into Winston's mind, and a lunatic impulse took hold of him.

He would go into the pub, he would scrape acquaintance with that old man and question him.

He would say to him: 'Tell me about your life when you were a boy.

What was it like in those days?

Were things better than they are now, or were they worse?' Hurriedly, lest he should have time to become frightened, he descended the steps and crossed the narrow street.

It was madness of course.

As usual, there was no definite rule against talking to proles and frequenting their pubs, but it was far too unusual an action to pass unnoticed.

If the patrols appeared he might plead an attack of faintness, but it was not likely that they would believe him.

He pushed open the door, and a hideous cheesy smell of sour beer hit him in the face.

As he entered the din of voices dropped to about half its volume.

Behind his back he could feel everyone eyeing his blue overalls.

A game of darts which was going on at the other end of the room interrupted itself for perhaps as much as thirty seconds.

The old man whom he had followed was stand- ing at the bar, having some kind of altercation with the barman, a large, stout, hook-nosed young man with enormous forearms.

A knot of others, standing round with glasses in their hands, were watching the scene.

'I arst you civil enough, didn't I?' said the old man, straighten- ing his shoulders pugnaciously.

'You telling me you ain't got a pint mug in the 'ole bleeding boozer?' 'And what in hell's name IS a pint?' said the barman, leaning forward with the tips of his fingers on the counter.

''Ark at 'im!

Calls 'isself a barman and don't know what a pint is!

Why, a pint's the 'alf of a quart, and there's four quarts to the gallon.

'Ave to teach you the A, B, C next.' 'Never heard of 'em,' said the barman shortly.

'Litre and half litre- that's all we serve.

There's the glasses on the shelf in front of you.' 'I likes a pint,' persisted the old man.

'You could 'a drawed me off a pint easy enough.

We didn't 'ave these bleeding litres when I was a young man.' 'When you were a young man we were all living in the tree- tops,' said the barman, with a glance at the other customers.

There was a shout of laughter, and the uneasiness caused by Winston's entry seemed to disappear.

The old man's white-stub- bled face had flushed pink.

He turned away, muttering to himself, and bumped into Winston.

Winston caught him gently by the arm.

'May I offer you a drink?' he said.

'You're a gent,' said the other, straightening his shoulders again.

He appeared not to have noticed Winston's blue overalls.

'Pint!' he added aggressively to the barman.

'Pint of wallop.' The barman swished two half-litres of dark-brown beer into thick glasses which he had rinsed in a bucket under the counter.

Beer was the only drink you could get in prole pubs.

The proles were supposed not to drink gin, though in practice they could get hold of it easily enough.

The game of darts was in full swing again, and the knot of men at the bar had begun talking about lottery tickets.

Winston's presence was forgotten for a moment.

There was a deal table under the window where he and the old man could talk without fear of being overheard.

It was horribly dangerous, but at any rate there was no telescreen in the room, a point he had made sure of as soon as he came in.

''E could 'a drawed me off a pint,' grumbled the old man as he settled down behind a glass.

'A 'alf litre ain't enough.

It don't sat- isfy.

And a 'ole litre's too much.

It starts my bladder running.

Let alone the price.' 'You must have seen great changes since you were a young man,' said Winston tentatively.

The old man's pale blue eyes moved from the darts board to the bar, and from the bar to the door of the Gents, as though it were in the bar-room that he expected the changes to have occurred.

'The beer was better,' he said finally.

'And cheaper!

When I was a young man, mild beer- wallop we used to call it- was fourpence a pint.

That was before the war, of course.' 'Which war was that?' said Winston.

'It's all wars,' said the old man vaguely.

He took up his glass, and his shoulders straightened again.

''Ere's wishing you the very best of 'ealth!' In his lean throat the sharp-pointed Adam's apple made a sur- prisingly rapid up-and-down movement, and the beer vanished.

Winston went to the bar and came back with two more half-litres.

The old man appeared to have forgotten his prejudice against drinking a full litre.

'You are very much older than I am,' said Winston.

'You must have been a grown man before I was born.

You can remember what it was like in the old days, before the Revolution.

People of my age don't really know anything about those times.

We can only read about them in books, and what it says in the books may not be true.

I should like your opinion on that.

The history books say that life before the Revolution was completely different from what it is now.

There was the most terrible oppression, injustice, poverty worse than anything we can imagine.

Here in London, the great mass of the people never had enough to eat from birth to death.

Half of them hadn't even boots on their feet.

They worked twelve hours a day, they left school at nine, they slept ten in a room.

And at the same time there were a very few people, only a few thousands- the capitalists, they were called- who were rich and powerful.

They owned everything that there was to own.

They lived in great gorgeous houses with thirty servants, they rode about in motor-cars and four-horse carriages, they drank cham- pagne, they wore top hats--' The old man brightened suddenly.

'Top 'ats!' he said.

'Funny you should mention 'em.

The same thing come into my 'ead only yesterday, I dono why.

I was jest thinking, I ain't seen a top 'at in years.

Gorn right out, they 'ave.

The last time I wore one was at my sister-in-law's funeral.

And that was- well, I couldn't give you the date, but it must'a been fifty years ago.

Of course it was only 'ired for the occasion, you understand.' 'It isn't very important about the top hats,' said Winston patiently.

'The point is, these capitalists- they and a few lawyers and priests and so forth who lived on them- were the lords of the earth.

Everything existed for their benefit.

You- the ordinary people, the workers- were their slaves.

They could do what they liked with you.

They could ship you off to Canada like cattle.

They could sleep with your daughters if they chose.

They could order you to be flogged with something called a cat-o'-nine tails.

You had to take your cap off when you passed them.

Every capi- talist went about with a gang of lackeys who--' The old man brightened again.

'Lackeys!' he said.

'Now there's a word I ain't 'eard since ever so long.

Lackeys!

That reg'lar takes me back, that does.

I recollect- oh, donkey's years ago- I used to sometimes go to 'Yde Park of a Sunday afternoon to 'ear the blokes making speeches.

Salvation Army, Roman Catholics, Jews, Indians- all sorts there was.

And there was one bloke- well, I couldn't give you 'is name, but a real powerful speaker 'e was.

'E didn't 'alf give it 'em!

"Lackeys!"

'e says, "lackeys of the bourgeoisie!

Flunkies of the ruling class!"

Parasites- that was another of them.

And 'yenas- 'e definitely called 'em 'yenas.

Of course 'e was referring to the Labour Party, you understand.' Winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross-pur- poses.

'What I really wanted to know was this,' he said.

'Do you feel that you have more freedom now than you had in those days?

Are you treated more like a human being?

In the old days, the rich people, the people at the top--' 'The 'Ouse of Lords,' put in the old man reminiscently.

'The House of Lords, if you like.

What I am asking is, were these people able to treat you as an inferior, simply because they were rich and you were poor?

Is it a fact, for instance, that you had to call them "Sir"

and take off your cap when you passed them?' The old man appeared to think deeply.

He drank off about a quarter of his beer before answering.

'Yes,' he said.

'They liked you to touch your cap to 'em.

It showed respect, like.

I didn't agree with it, myself, but I done it often enough.

Had to, as you might say.' 'And was it usual- I'm only quoting what I've read in history books- was it usual for these people and their servants to push you off the pavement into the gutter?' 'One of 'em pushed me once,' said the old man.

'I recollect it as if it was yesterday.

It was Boat Race night- terribly rowdy they used to get on Boat Race night- and I bumps into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenue.

Quite a gent, 'e was- dress shirt, top 'at, black overcoat.

'E was kind of zig-zagging across the pavement, and I bumps into 'im accidental-like.

'E says, "Why can't you look where you're going?"

'e says.

I say, "Ju think you've bought the bleeding pavement?"

'E says, "I'll twist your bloody 'ead off if you get fresh with me."

I says, "You're drunk.

I'll give you in charge in 'alf a minute,"

I says.

An' if you'll believe me, 'e puts 'is 'and on my chest and gives me a shove as pretty near sent me under the wheels of a bus.

Well, I was young in them days, and I was going to 'ave fetched 'im one, only--' A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston.

The old man's memory was nothing but a rubbish-heap of details.

One could question him all day without getting any real information.

The party histories might still be true, after a fashion: they might even be completely true.

He made a last attempt.

'Perhaps I have not made myself clear,' he said.

'What I'm trying to say is this.

You have been alive a very long time; you lived half your life before the Revolution.

In 1925, for instance, you were already grown up.

Would you say from what you can remember, that life in 1925 was better than it is now, or worse?

If you could choose, would you prefer to live then or now?' The old man looked meditatively at the darts board.

He fin- ished up his beer, more slowly than before.

When he spoke it was with a tolerant philosophical air, as though the beer had mellowed him.

'I know what you expect me to say,' he said.

'You expect me to say as I'd sooner be young again.

Most people'd say they'd sooner be young, if you arst 'em.

You got your 'ealth and strength when you're young.

When you get to my time of life you ain't never well.

I suffer something wicked from my feet, and my bladder's jest terrible.

Six and seven times a night it 'as me out of bed.

On the other 'and, there's great advantages in being a old man.

You ain't got the same worries.

No truck with women, and that's a great thing.

I ain't 'ad a woman for near on thirty year, if you'd credit it.

Nor wanted to, what's more.' Winston sat back against the window-sill.

It was no use going on.

He was about to buy some more beer when the old man sud- denly got up and shuffled rapidly into the stinking urinal at the side of the room.

The extra half-litre was already working on him.

Winston sat for a minute or two gazing at his empty glass, and hardly noticed when his feet carried him out into the street again.

Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, the huge and simple question, 'Was life better before the Revolution than it is now?' would have ceased once and for all to be answerable.

But in effect it was unanswerable even now, since the few scattered survivors from the ancient world were incapable of comparing one age with another.

They remembered a million useless things, a quarrel with a workmate, a hunt for a lost bicycle pump, the expression on a long-dead sister's face, the swirls of dust on a windy morning sev- enty years ago: but all the relevant facts were outside the range of their vision.

They were like the ant, which can see small objects but not large ones.

And when memory failed and written records were falsified- when that happened, the claim of the Party to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted, because there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standard against which it could be tested.

At this moment his train of thought stopped abruptly.

He halted and looked up.

He was in a narrow street, with a few dark little shops, interspersed among dwelling-houses.

Immediately above his head there hung three discoloured metal balls which looked as if they had once been gilded.

He seemed to know the place.

Of course!

He was standing outside the junk-shop where he had bought the diary.

A twinge of fear went through him.

It had been a sufficiently rash act to buy the book in the beginning, and he had sworn never to come near the place again.

And yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wander, his feet had brought him back here of their own accord.

It was precisely against suicidal impulses of this kind that he had hoped to guard himself by opening the diary.

At the same time he noticed that although it was nearly twenty-one hours the shop was still open.

With the feeling that he would be less conspicuous inside than hanging about on the pavement, he stepped through the doorway.

If questioned, he could plausibly say that he was trying to buy razor blades.

The proprietor had just lighted a hanging oil lamp which gave off an unclean but friendly smell.

He was a man of perhaps sixty, frail and bowed, with a long, benevolent nose, and mild eyes dis- torted by thick spectacles.

His hair was almost white, but his eyebrows were bushy and still black.

His spectacles, his gentle, fussy movements, and the fact that he was wearing an aged jacket of black velvet, gave him a vague air of intellectuality, as though he had been some kind of literary man, or perhaps a musician.

His voice was soft, as though faded, and his accent less debased than that of the majority of proles.

'I recognized you on the pavement,' he said immediately.

'You're the gentleman that bought the young lady's keepsake album.

That was a beautiful bit of paper, that was.

Cream-laid, it used to be called.

There's been no paper like that made for- oh, I dare say fifty years.' He peered at Winston over the top of his spectacles.

'Is there anything special I can do for you?

Or did you just want to look round?' 'I was passing,' said Winston vaguely.

'I just looked in.

I don't want anything in particular.' 'It's just as well,' said the other, 'because I don't suppose I could have satisfied you.' He made an apologetic gesture with his soft- palmed hand.

'You see how it is; an empty shop, you might say.

Between you and me, the antique trade's just about finished.

No demand any longer, and no stock either.

Furniture, china, glass it's all been broken up by degrees.

And of course the metal stuff's mostly been melted down.

I haven't seen a brass candlestick in years.' The tiny interior of the shop was in fact uncomfortably full, but there was almost nothing in it of the slightest value.

The floor- space was very restricted, because all round the walls were stacked innumerable dusty picture-frames.

In the window there were trays of nuts and bolts, worn-out chisels, penknives with broken blades, tarnished watches that did not even pretend to be in going order, and other miscellaneous rubbish.

Only on a small table in the corner was there a litter of odds and ends- lacquered snuffboxes, agate brooches, and the like- which looked as though they might include something interesting.

As Winston wandered towards the table his eye was caught by a round, smooth thing that gleamed softly in the lamplight, and he picked it up.

It was a heavy lump of glass, curved on one side, flat on the other, making almost a hemisphere.

There was a peculiar softness, as of rainwater, in both the colour and the texture of the glass.

At the heart of it, magnified by the curved surface, there was a strange, pink, convoluted object that recalled a rose or a sea anemone.

'What is it?' said Winston, fascinated.

'That's coral, that is,' said the old man.

'It must have come from the Indian Ocean.

They used to kind of embed it in the glass.

That wasn't made less than a hundred years ago.

More, by the look of it.' 'It's a beautiful thing,' said Winston.

'It is a beautiful thing,' said the other appreciatively.

'But there's not many that'd say so nowadays.' He coughed.

'Now, if it so happened that you wanted to buy it, that'd cost you four dollars.

I can remember when a thing like that would have fetched eight pounds, and eight pounds was- well, I can't work it out, but it was a lot of money.

But who cares about genuine antiques nowa- days- even the few that's left?' Winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thing into his pocket.

What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty as the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite different from the present one.

The soft, rainwa- tery glass was not like any glass that he had ever seen.

The thing was doubly attractive because of its apparent uselessness, though he could guess that it must once have been intended as a paper- weight.

It was very heavy in his pocket, but fortunately it did not make much of a bulge.

It was a queer thing, even a compromising thing, for a Party member to have in his possession.

Anything old, and for that matter anything beautiful, was always vaguely sus- pect.

The old man had grown noticeably more cheerful after receiving the four dollars.

Winston realized that he would have accepted three or even two.

'There's another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at,' he said.

'There's not much in it.

Just a few pieces.

We'll do with a light if we're going upstairs.' He lit another lamp, and, with bowed back, led the way slowly up the steep and worn stairs and along a tiny passage, into a room which did not give on the street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest of chimney-pots.

Winston noticed that the furniture was still arranged as though the room were meant to be lived in.

There was a strip of carpet on the floor, a picture or two on the walls, and a deep, slatternly arm-chair drawn up to the fireplace.

An old-fashioned glass clock with a twelve-hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece.

Under the window, and occupying nearly a quarter of the room, was an enormous bed with the mat- tress still on it.

'We lived here till my wife died,' said the old man half apolo- getically.

'I'm selling the furniture off by little and little.

Now that's a beautiful mahogany bed, or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of it.

But I dare say you'd find it a little bit cumbersome.' He was holding the lamp high up, so as to illuminate the whole room, and in the warm dim light the place looked curiously invit- ing.

The thought flitted through Winston's mind that it would probably be quite easy to rent the room for a few dollars a week, if he dared to take the risk.

It was a wild, impossible notion, to be abandoned as soon as thought of; but the room had awakened in him a sort of nostalgia, a sort of ancestral memory.

It seemed to him that he knew exactly what it felt like to sit in a room like this, in an arm-chair beside an open fire with your feet in the fender and a kettle on the hob; utterly alone, utterly secure, with nobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound except the singing of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock.

'There's no telescreen!' he could not help murmuring.

'Ah,' said the old man, 'I never had one of those things.

Too expensive.

And I never seemed to feel the need of it, somehow.

Now that's a nice gateleg table in the corner there.

Though of course you'd have to put new hinges on it if you wanted to use the flaps.' There was a small bookcase in the other corner, and Winston had already gravitated towards it.

It contained nothing but rub- bish.

The hunting-down and destruction of books had been done with the same thoroughness in the prole quarters as everywhere else.

It was very unlikely that there existed anywhere in Oceania a copy of a book printed earlier than 1960.

The old man, still car- rying the lamp, was standing in front of a picture in a rosewood frame which hung on the other side of the fireplace, opposite the bed.

'Now, if you happen to be interested in old prints at all--' he began delicately.

Winston came across to examine the picture.

It was a steel engraving of an oval building with rectangular windows, and a small tower in front.

There was a railing running round the build- ing, and at the rear end there was what appeared to be a statue.

Winston gazed at it for some moments.

It seemed vaguely famil- iar, though he did not remember the statue.

'The frame's fixed to the wall,' said the old man, 'but I could unscrew it for you, I dare say.' 'I know that building,' said Winston finally.

'It's a ruin now.

It's in the middle of the street outside the Palace of Justice.' 'That's right.

Outside the Law Courts.

It was bombed in- oh, many years ago.

It was a church at one time, St Clement Danes, its name was.' He smiled apologetically, as though conscious of saying something slightly ridiculous, and added: 'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's!' 'What's that?' said Winston.

'Oh- "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's."

That was a rhyme we had when I was a little boy.

How it goes on I don't remember, but I do know it ended up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, Here comes a chopper to chop off your head."

It was a kind of a dance.

They held out their arms for you to pass under, and when they came to "Here comes a chopper to chop off your head"

they brought their arms down and caught you.

It was just names of churches.

All the London churches were in it- all the principal ones, that is.' Winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged.

It was always difficult to determine the age of a London building.

Anything large and impressive, if it was reasonably new in appearance, was automatically claimed as having been built since the Revolution, while anything that was obviously of earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the Middle Ages.

The centuries of capitalism were held to have produced nothing of any value.

One could not learn history from architecture any more than one could learn it from books.

Statues, inscriptions, memo- rial stones, the names of streets- anything that might throw light upon the past had been systematically altered.

'I never knew it had been a church,' he said.

'There's a lot of them left, really,' said the old man, 'though they've been put to other uses.

Now, how did that rhyme go?

Ah!

I've got it!

"Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's--"

there, now, that's as far as I can get.

A farthing, that was a small copper coin, looked something like a cent.' 'Where was St Martin's?' said Winston.

'St Martin's?

That's still standing.

It's in Victory Square, along- side the picture gallery.

A building with a kind of a triangular porch and pillars in front, and a big flight of steps.' Winston knew the place well.

It was a museum used for prop- aganda displays of various kinds- scale models of rocket bombs and Floating Fortresses, waxwork tableaux illustrating enemy atrocities, and the like.

'St Martin's-in-the-Fields it used to be called,' supplemented the old man, 'though I don't recollect any fields anywhere in those parts.' Winston did not buy the picture.

It would have been an even more incongruous possession than the glass paperweight, and impossible to carry home, unless it were taken out of its frame.

But he lingered for some minutes more, talking to the old man, whose name, he discovered, was not Weeks- as one might have gathered from the inscription over the shop-front- but Charrington.

Mr Charrington, it seemed, was a widower aged sixty-three and had inhabited this shop for thirty years.

Throughout that time he had been intending to alter the name over the window, but had never quite got to the point of doing it.

All the while that they were talking the half-remembered rhyme kept running through Winston's head.

Oranges and lemons say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's!

It was curious, but when you said it to yourself you had the illusion of actually hearing bells, the bells of a lost London that still existed somewhere or other, disguised and for- gotten.

From one ghostly steeple after another he seemed to hear them pealing forth.

Yet so far as he could remember he had never in real life heard church bells ringing.

He got away from Mr Charrington and went down the stairs alone, so as not to let the old man see him reconnoitring the street before stepping out of the door.

He had already made up his mind that after a suitable interval- a month, say- he would take the risk of visiting the shop again.

It was perhaps not more dangerous than shirking an evening at the Centre.

The serious piece of folly had been to come back here in the first place, after buying the diary and without knowing whether the proprietor of the shop could be trusted.

However--!

Yes, he thought again, he would come back.

He would buy fur- ther scraps of beautiful rubbish.

He would buy the engraving of St Clement Danes, take it out of its frame, and carry it home con- cealed under the jacket of his overalls.

He would drag the rest of that poem out of Mr Charrington's memory.

Even the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs flashed momentarily through his mind again.

For perhaps five seconds exaltation made him careless, and he stepped out on to the pavement without so much as a preliminary glance through the window.

He had even started humming to an improvised tune Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, say the-- Suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bowels to water.

A figure in blue overalls was coming down the pavement, not ten metres away.

It was the girl from the Fiction Department, the girl with dark hair.

The light was failing, but there was no difficulty in recognizing her.

She looked him straight in the face, then walked quickly on as though she had not seen him.

For a few seconds Winston was too paralysed to move.

Then he turned to the right and walked heavily away, not noticing for the moment that he was going in the wrong direction.

At any rate, one question was settled.

There was no doubting any longer that the girl was spying on him.

She must have followed him here, because it was not credible that by pure chance she should have happened to be walking on the same evening up the same obscure backstreet, kilometres distant from any quarter where Party mem- bers lived.

It was too great a coincidence.

Whether she was really an agent of the Thought Police, or simply an amateur spy actuated by officiousness, hardly mattered.

It was enough that she was watching him.

Probably she had seen him go into the pub as well.

It was an effort to walk.

The lump of glass in his pocket banged against his thigh at each step, and he was half minded to take it out and throw it away.

The worst thing was the pain in his belly.

For a couple of minutes he had the feeling that he would die if he did not reach a lavatory soon.

But there would be no public lava- tories in a quarter like this.

Then the spasm passed, leaving a dull ache behind.

The street was a blind alley.

Winston halted, stood for several seconds wondering vaguely what to do, then turned round and began to retrace his steps.

As he turned it occurred to him that the girl had only passed him three minutes ago and that by running he could probably catch up with her.

He could keep on her track till they were in some quiet place, and then smash her skull in with a cobblestone.

The piece of glass in his pocket would be heavy enough for the job.

But he abandoned the idea immediately, because even the thought of making any physical effort was unbearable.

He could not run, he could not strike a blow.

Besides, she was young and lusty and would defend herself.

He thought also of hurrying to the Community Centre and staying there till the place closed, so as to establish a partial alibi for the evening.

But that too was impossible.

A deadly lassitude had taken hold of him.

All he wanted was to get home quickly and then sit down and be quiet.

It was after twenty-two hours when he got back to the flat.

The lights would be switched off at the main at twenty-three thirty.

He went into the kitchen and swallowed nearly a teacupful of Victory Gin.

Then he went to the table in the alcove, sat down, and took the diary out of the drawer.

But he did not open it at once.

From the telescreen a brassy female voice was squalling a patriotic song.

He sat staring at the marbled cover of the book, trying without success to shut the voice out of his consciousness.

It was at night that they came for you, always at night.

The proper thing was to kill yourself before they got you.

Undoubtedly some people did so.

Many of the disappearances were actually suicides.

But it needed desperate courage to kill yourself in a world where firearms, or any quick and certain poison, were completely unprocurable.

He thought with a kind of astonishment of the biological uselessness of pain and fear, the treachery of the human body which always freezes into inertia at exactly the moment when a special effort is needed.

He might have silenced the dark-haired girl if only he had acted quickly enough: but precisely because of the extremity of his danger he had lost the power to act.

It struck him that in moments of crisis one is never fighting against an external enemy, but always against one's own body.

Even now, in spite of the gin, the dull ache in his belly made consecutive thought impossible.

And it is the same, he perceived, in all seemingly heroic or tragic situations.

On the bat- tlefield, in the torture chamber, on a sinking ship, the issues that you are fighting for are always forgotten, because the body swells up until it fills the universe, and even when you are not paralysed by fright or screaming with pain, life is a moment-to-moment struggle against hunger or cold or sleeplessness, against a sour stomach or an aching tooth.

He opened the diary.

It was important to write something down.

The woman on the telescreen had started a new song.

Her voice seemed to stick into his brain like jagged splinters of glass.

He tried to think of O'Brien, for whom, or to whom, the diary was written, but instead he began thinking of the things that would happen to him after the Thought Police took him away.

It would not matter if they killed you at once.

To be killed was what you expected.

But before death (nobody spoke of such things, yet everybody knew of them) there was the routine of confession that had to be gone through: the grovelling on the floor and screaming for mercy, the crack of broken bones, the smashed teeth and bloody clots of hair.

Why did you have to endure it, since the end was always the same?

Why was it not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your life?

Nobody ever escaped detection, and nobody ever failed to confess.

When once you had succumbed to thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date you would be dead.

Why then did that horror, which altered nothing, have to lie embedded in future time?

He tried with a little more success than before to summon up the image of O'Brien.

'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' O'Brien had said to him.

He knew what it meant, or thought he knew.

The place where there is no darkness was the imagined future, which one would never see, but which, by fore- knowledge, one could mystically share in.

But with the voice from the telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the train of thought further.

He put a cigarette in his mouth.

Half the tobacco promptly fell out on to his tongue, a bitter dust which was diffi- cult to spit out again.

The face of Big Brother swam into his mind, displacing that of O'Brien.

Just as he had done a few days earlier, he slid a coin out of his pocket and looked at it.

The face gazed up at him, heavy, calm, protecting: but what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache?

Like a leaden knell the words came back at him: WAR IS PEACE FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH PART TWO It was the middle of the morning, and Winston had left the cubi- cle to go to the lavatory.

A solitary figure was coming towards him from the other end of the long, brightly-lit corridor.

It was the girl with dark hair.

Four days had gone past since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk-shop.

As she came nearer he saw that her right arm was in a sling, not noticeable at a distance because it was of the same colour as her overalls.

Probably she had crushed her hand while swinging round one of the big kaleidoscopes on which the plots of novels were 'roughed in'.

It was a common accident in the Fiction Department.

They were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stumbled and fell almost flat on her face.

A sharp cry of pain was wrung out of her.

She must have fallen right on the injured arm.

Winston stopped short.

The girl had risen to her knees.

Her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which her mouth stood out redder than ever.

Her eyes were fixed on his, with an appealing expres- sion that looked more like fear than pain.

A curious emotion stirred in Winston's heart.

In front of him was an enemy who was trying to kill him: in front of him, also, was a human creature, in pain and perhaps with a broken bone.

Already he had instinctively started forward to help her.

In the moment when he had seen her fall on the bandaged arm, it had been as though he felt the pain in his own body.

'You're hurt?' he said.

'It's nothing.

My arm.

It'll be all right in a second.' She spoke as though her heart were fluttering.

She had certainly turned very pale.

'You haven't broken anything?' 'No, I'm all right.

It hurt for a moment, that's all.' She held out her free hand to him, and he helped her up.

She had regained some of her colour, and appeared very much better.

'It's nothing,' she repeated shortly.

'I only gave my wrist a bit of a bang.

Thanks, comrade!' And with that she walked on in the direction in which she had been going, as briskly as though it had really been nothing.

The whole incident could not have taken as much as half a minute.

Not to let one's feelings appear in one's face was a habit that had acquired the status of an instinct, and in any case they had been standing straight in front of a telescreen when the thing happened.

Nevertheless it had been very difficult not to betray a momentary surprise, for in the two or three seconds while he was helping her up the girl had slipped something into his hand.

There was no question that she had done it intentionally.

It was something small and flat.

As he passed through the lavatory door he transferred it to his pocket and felt it with the tips of his fingers.

It was a scrap of paper folded into a square.

While he stood at the urinal he managed, with a little more fin- gering, to get it unfolded.

Obviously there must be a message of some kind written on it.

For a moment he was tempted to take it into one of the water-closets and read it at once.

But that would be shocking folly, as he well knew.

There was no place where you could be more certain that the telescreens were watched continu- ously.

He went back to his cubicle, sat down, threw the fragment of paper casually among the other papers on the desk, put on his spectacles and hitched the speakwrite towards him.

'Five min- utes,' he told himself, 'five minutes at the very least!' His heart bumped in his breast with frightening loudness.

Fortunately the piece of work he was engaged on was mere routine, the rectifica- tion of a long list of figures, not needing close attention.

Whatever was written on the paper, it must have some kind of political meaning.

So far as he could see there were two possibili- ties.

One, much the more likely, was that the girl was an agent of the Thought Police, just as he had feared.

He did not know why the Thought Police should choose to deliver their messages in such a fashion, but perhaps they had their reasons.

The thing that was written on the paper might be a threat, a summons, an order to commit suicide, a trap of some description.

But there was another, wilder possibility that kept raising its head, though he tried vainly to suppress it.

This was, that the message did not come from the Thought Police at all, but from some kind of underground organ- ization.

Perhaps the Brotherhood existed after all!

Perhaps the girl was part of it!

No doubt the idea was absurd, but it had sprung into his mind in the very instant of feeling the scrap of paper in his hand.

It was not till a couple of minutes later that the other, more probable explanation had occurred to him.

And even now, though his intellect told him that the message probably meant death- still, that was not what he believed, and the unreasonable hope persisted, and his heart banged, and it was with difficulty that he kept his voice from trembling as he murmured his figures into the speakwrite.

He rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid it into the pneumatic tube.

Eight minutes had gone by.

He re-adjusted his spectacles on his nose, sighed, and drew the next batch of work towards him, with the scrap of paper on top of it.

He flattened it out.

On it was written, in a large unformed handwriting: I LOVE YOU.

For several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incrim- inating thing into the memory hole.

When he did so, although he knew very well the danger of showing too much interest, he could not resist reading it once again, just to make sure that the words were really there.

For the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work.

What was even worse than having to focus his mind on a series of nig- gling jobs was the need to conceal his agitation from the telescreen.

He felt as though a fire were burning in his belly.

Lunch in the hot, crowded, noise-filled canteen was torment.

He had hoped to be alone for a little while during the lunch hour, but as bad luck would have it the imbecile Parsons flopped down beside him, the tang of his sweat almost defeating the tinny smell of stew, and kept up a stream of talk about the preparations for Hate Week.

He was particularly enthusiastic about a papier-mache model of Big Brother's head, two metres wide, which was being made for the occasion by his daughter's troop of Spies.

The irri- tating thing was that in the racket of voices Winston could hardly hear what Parsons was saying, and was constantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be repeated.

Just once he caught a glimpse of the girl, at a table with two other girls at the far end of the room.

She appeared not to have seen him, and he did not look in that direction again.

The afternoon was more bearable.

Immediately after lunch there arrived a delicate, difficult piece of work which would take several hours and necessitated putting everything else aside.

It consisted in falsifying a series of production reports of two years ago, in such a way as to cast discredit on a prominent member of the Inner Party, who was now under a cloud.

This was the kind of thing that Winston was good at, and for more than two hours he succeeded in shutting the girl out of his mind altogether.

Then the memory of her face came back, and with it a raging, intolerable desire to be alone.

Until he could be alone it was impossible to think this new development out.

Tonight was one of his nights at the Community Centre.

He wolfed another tasteless meal in the of a 'discussion group', played two games of table tennis, swal- lowed several glasses of gin, and sat for half an hour through a lecture entitled 'Ingsoc in relation to chess'.

His soul writhed with boredom, but for once he had had no impulse to shirk his evening at the Centre.

At the sight of the words I LOVE YOU the desire to stay alive had welled up in him, and the taking of minor risks sud- denly seemed stupid.

It was not till twenty-three hours, when he was home and in bed- in the darkness, where you were safe even from the telescreen so long as you kept silent- that he was able to think continuously.

It was a physical problem that had to be solved: how to get in touch with the girl and arrange a meeting.

He did not consider any longer the possibility that she might be laying some kind of trap for him.

He knew that it was not so, because of her unmis- takable agitation when she handed him the note.

Obviously she had been frightened out of her wits, as well she might be.

Nor did the idea of refusing her advances even cross his mind.

Only five nights ago he had contemplated smashing her skull in with a cob- blestone, but that was of no importance.

He thought of her naked, youthful body, as he had seen it in his dream.

He had imagined her a fool like all the rest of them, her head stuffed with lies and hatred, her belly full of ice.

A kind of fever seized him at the thought that he might lose her, the white youthful body might slip away from him!

What he feared more than anything else was that she would simply change her mind if he did not get in touch with her quickly.

But the physical difficulty of meeting was enormous.

It was like trying to make a move at chess when you were already mated.

Whichever way you turned, the telescreen faced you.

Actually, all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred to him within five minutes of reading the note; but now, with time to think, he went over them one by one, as though laying out a row of instruments on a table.

Obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morn- ing could not be repeated.

If she had worked in the Records Department it might have been comparatively simple, but he had only a very dim idea whereabouts in the building the Fiction Department lay, and he had no pretext for going there.

If he had known where she lived, and at what time she left work, he could have contrived to meet her somewhere on her way home; but to try to follow her home was not safe, because it would mean loi- tering about outside the Ministry, which was bound to be noticed.

As for sending a letter through the mails, it was out of the ques- tion.

By a routine that was not even secret, all letters were opened in transit.

Actually, few people ever wrote letters.

For the mes- sages that it was occasionally necessary to send, there were printed postcards with long lists of phrases, and you struck out the ones that were inapplicable.

In any case he did not know the girl's name, let alone her address.

Finally he decided that the safest place was the canteen.

If he could get her at a table by herself, somewhere in the middle of the room, not too near the tele- screens, and with a sufficient buzz of conversation all round- if these conditions endured for, say, thirty seconds, it might be pos- sible to exchange a few words.

For a week after this, life was like a restless dream.

On the next day she did not appear in the canteen until he was leaving it, the whistle having already blown.

Presumably she had been changed on to a later shift.

They passed each other without a glance.

On the day after that she was in the canteen at the usual time, but with three other girls and immediately under a telescreen.

Then for three dreadful days she did not appear at all.

His whole mind and body seemed to be afflicted with an unbearable sensitivity, a sort of transparency, which made every movement, every sound, every contact, every word that he had to speak or listen to, an agony.

Even in sleep he could not altogether escape from her image.

He did not touch the diary during those days.

If there was any relief, it was in his work, in which he could sometimes forget himself for ten minutes at a stretch.

He had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her.

There was no enquiry he could make.

She might have been vaporized, she might have committed suicide, she might have been transferred to the other end of Oceania: worst and likeliest of all, she might simply have changed her mind and decided to avoid him.

The next day she reappeared.

Her arm was out of the sling and she had a band of sticking-plaster round her wrist.

The relief of seeing her was so great that he could not resist staring directly at her for several seconds.

On the following day he very nearly suc- ceeded in speaking to her.

When he came into the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from the wall, and was quite alone.

It was early, and the place was not very full.

The queue edged for- ward till Winston was almost at the counter, then was held up for two minutes because someone in front was complaining that he had not received his tablet of saccharine.

But the girl was still alone when Winston secured his tray and began to make for her table.

He walked casually towards her, his eyes searching for a place at some table beyond her.

She was perhaps three metres away from him.

Another two seconds would do it.

Then a voice behind him called, 'Smith!' He pretended not to hear.

'Smith!' repeated the voice, more loudly.

It was no use.

He turned round.

A blond-headed, silly-faced young man named Wilsher, whom he barely knew, was inviting him with a smile to a vacant place at his table.

It was not safe to refuse.

After having been recognized, he could not go and sit at a table with an unattended girl.

It was too noticeable.

He sat down with a friendly smile.

The silly blond face beamed into his.

Winston had a hallucination of himself smashing a pick-axe right into the middle of it.

The girl's table filled up a few minutes later.

But she must have seen him coming towards her, and perhaps she would take the hint.

Next day he took care to arrive early.

Surely enough, she was at a table in about the same place, and again alone.

The person immediately ahead of him in the queue was a small, swiftly-moving, beetle-like man with a flat face and tiny, suspicious eyes.

As Winston turned away from the counter with his tray, he saw that the little man was making straight for the girl's table.

His hopes sank again.

There was a vacant place at a table further away, but something in the little man's appearance suggested that he would be sufficiently attentive to his own com- fort to choose the emptiest table.

With ice at his heart Winston followed.

It was no use unless he could get the girl alone.

At this moment there was a tremendous crash.

The little man was sprawl- ing on all fours, his tray had gone flying, two streams of soup and coffee were flowing across the floor.

He started to his feet with a malignant glance at Winston, whom he evidently suspected of having tripped him up.

But it was all right.

Five seconds later, with a thundering heart, Winston was sitting at the girl's table.

He did not look at her.

He unpacked his tray and promptly began eating.

It was all-important to speak at once, before anyone else came, but now a terrible fear had taken possession of him.

A week had gone by since she had first approached him.

She would have changed her mind, she must have changed her mind!

It was impossible that this affair should end successfully; such things did not happen in real life.

He might have flinched altogether from speaking if at this moment he had not seen Ampleforth, the hairy- eared poet, wandering limply round the room with a tray, looking for a place to sit down.

In his vague way Ampleforth was attached to Winston, and would certainly sit down at his table if he caught sight of him.

There was perhaps a minute in which to act.

Both Winston and the girl were eating steadily.

The stuff they were eating was a thin stew, actually a soup, of haricot beans.

In a low murmur Winston began speaking.

Neither of them looked up; steadily they spooned the watery stuff into their mouths, and between spoonfuls exchanged the few necessary words in low expressionless voices.

'What time do you leave work?' 'Eighteen-thirty.' 'Where can we meet?' 'Victory Square, near the monument.' 'It's full of telescreens.' 'It doesn't matter if there's a crowd.' 'Any signal?' 'No.

Don't come up to me until you see me among a lot of people.

And don't look at me.

Just keep somewhere near me.' 'What time?' 'Nineteen hours.' 'All right.' Ampleforth failed to see Winston and sat down at another table.

They did not speak again, and, so far as it was possible for two people sitting on opposite sides of the same table, they did not look at one another.

The girl finished her lunch quickly and made off, while Winston stayed to smoke a cigarette.

Winston was in Victory Square before the appointed time.

He wandered round the base of the enormous fluted column, at the top of which Big Brother's statue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished the Eurasian aeroplanes (the Eastasian aeroplanes, it had been, a few years ago) in the Battle of Airstrip One.

In the street in front of it there was a statue of a man on horseback which was supposed to represent Oliver Cromwell.

At five minutes past the hour the girl had still not appeared.

Again the terrible fear seized upon Winston.

She was not coming, she had changed her mind!

He walked slowly up to the north side of the square and got a sort of pale-coloured pleas- ure from identifying St Martin's Church, whose bells, when it had bells, had chimed 'You owe me three farthings.' Then he saw the girl standing at the base of the monument, reading or pretending to read a poster which ran spirally up the column.

It was not safe to go near her until some more people had accumulated.

There were telescreens all round the pediment.

But at this moment there was a din of shouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from some- where to the left.

Suddenly everyone seemed to be running across the square.

The girl nipped nimbly round the lions at the base of the monument and joined in the rush.

Winston followed.

As he ran, he gathered from some shouted remarks that a convoy of Eurasian prisoners was passing.

Already a dense mass of people was blocking the south side of the square.

Winston, at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outer edge of any kind of scrimmage, shoved, butted, squirmed his way forward into the heart of the crowd.

Soon he was within arm's length of the girl, but the way was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormous woman, presumably his wife, who seemed to form an impenetra- ble wall of flesh.

Winston wriggled himself sideways, and with a violent lunge managed to drive his shoulder between them.

For a moment it felt as though his entrails were being ground to pulp between the two muscular hips, then he had broken through, sweating a little.

He was next to the girl.

They were shoulder to shoulder, both staring fixedly in front of them.

A long line of trucks, with wooden-faced guards armed with sub-machine guns standing upright in each corner, was passing slowly down the street.

In the trucks little yellow men in shabby greenish uniforms were squatting, jammed close together.

Their sad, Mongolian faces gazed out over the sides of the trucks utterly incurious.

Occasionally when a truck jolted there was a clank- clank of metal: all the prisoners were wearing leg-irons.

Truck-load after truck-load of the sad faces passed.

Winston knew they were there but he saw them only intermittently.

The girl's shoulder, and her arm right down to the elbow, were pressed against his.

Her cheek was almost near enough for him to feel its warmth.

She had immediately taken charge of the situation, just as she had done in the canteen.

She began speaking in the same expressionless voice as before, with lips barely moving, a mere murmur easily drowned by the din of voices and the rumbling of the trucks.

'Can you hear me?' 'Yes.' 'Can you get Sunday afternoon off?' 'Yes.' 'Then listen carefully.

You'll have to remember this.

Go to Paddington Station--' With a sort of military precision that astonished him, she out- lined the route that he was to follow.

A half-hour railway journey; turn left outside the station; two kilometres along the road; a gate with the top bar missing; a path across a field; a grass-grown lane; a track between bushes; a dead tree with moss on it.

It was as though she had a map inside her head.

'Can you remember all that?' she murmured finally.

'Yes.' 'You turn left, then right, then left again.

And the gate's got no top bar.' 'Yes.

What time?' 'About fifteen.

You may have to wait.

I'll get there by another way.

Are you sure you remember everything?' 'Yes.' 'Then get away from me as quick as you can.' She need not have told him that.

But for the moment they could not extricate themselves from the crowd.

The trucks were still filing past, the people still insatiably gaping.

At the start there had been a few boos and hisses, but it came only from the Party mem- bers among the crowd, and had soon stopped.

The prevailing emotion was simply curiosity.

Foreigners, whether from Eurasia or from Eastasia, were a kind of strange animal.

One literally never saw them except in the guise of prisoners, and even as pris- oners one never got more than a momentary glimpse of them.

Nor did one know what became of them, apart from the few who were hanged as war-criminals: the others simply vanished, presumably into forced-labour camps.

The round Mogol faces had given way to faces of a more European type, dirty, bearded and exhausted.

From over scrubby cheekbones eyes looked into Winston's, some- times with strange intensity, and flashed away again.

The convoy was drawing to an end.

In the last truck he could see an aged man, his face a mass of grizzled hair, standing upright with wrists crossed in front of him, as though he were used to having them bound together.

It was almost time for Winston and the girl to part.

But at the last moment, while the crowd still hemmed them in, her hand felt for his and gave it a fleeting squeeze.

It could not have been ten seconds, and yet it seemed a long time that their hands were clasped together.

He had time to learn every detail of her hand.

He explored the long fingers, the shapely nails, the work-hardened palm with its row of callouses, the smooth flesh under the wrist.

Merely from feeling it he would have known it by sight.

In the same instant it occurred to him that he did not know what colour the girl's eyes were.

They were prob- ably brown, but people with dark hair sometimes had blue eyes.

To turn his head and look at her would have been inconceivable folly.

With hands locked together, invisible among the press of bodies, they stared steadily in front of them, and instead of the eyes of the girl, the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfully at Winston out of nests of hair.

Winston picked his way up the lane through dappled light and shade, stepping out into pools of gold wherever the boughs parted.

Under the trees to the left of him the ground was misty with bluebells.

The air seemed to kiss one's skin.

It was the second of May.

From somewhere deeper in the heart of the wood came the droning of ring-doves.

He was a bit early.

There had been no difficulties about the journey, and the girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than he would normally have been.

Presumably she could be trusted to find a safe place.

In general you could not assume that you were much safer in the country than in London.

There were no telescreens, of course, but there was always the danger of concealed microphones by which your voice might be picked up and recognized; besides, it was not easy to make a jour- ney by yourself without attracting attention.

For distances of less than 100 kilometres it was not necessary to get your passport endorsed, but sometimes there were patrols hanging about the railway stations, who examined the papers of any Party member they found there and asked awkward questions.

However, no patrols had appeared, and on the walk from the station he had made sure by cautious backward glances that he was not being followed.

The train was full of proles, in holiday mood because of the summery weather.

The wooden-seated carriage in which he travelled was filled to overflowing by a single enormous family, ranging from a toothless great-grandmother to a month-old baby, going out to spend an afternoon with 'in-laws' in the country, and, as they freely explained to Winston, to get hold of a little black-market butter.

The lane widened, and in a minute he came to the footpath she had told him of, a mere cattle-track which plunged between the bushes.

He had no watch, but it could not be fifteen yet.

The blue- bells were so thick underfoot that it was impossible not to tread on them.

He knelt down and began picking some partly to pass the time away, but also from a vague idea that he would like to have a bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when they met.

He had got together a big bunch and was smelling their faint sickly scent when a sound at his back froze him, the unmistakable crackle of a foot on twigs.

He went on picking bluebells.

It was the best thing to do.

It might be the girl, or he might have been followed after all.

To look round was to show guilt.

He picked another and another.

A hand fell lightly on his shoulder.

He looked up.

It was the girl.

She shook her head, evidently as a warning that he must keep silent, then parted the bushes and quickly led the way along the narrow track into the wood.

Obviously she had been that way before, for she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit.

Winston followed, still clasping his bunch of flowers.

His first feeling was relief, but as he watched the strong slender body moving in front of him, with the scarlet sash that was just tight enough to bring out the curve of her hips, the sense of his own inferiority was heavy upon him.

Even now it seemed quite likely that when she turned round and looked at him she would draw back after all.

The sweetness of the air and the greenness of the leaves daunted him.

Already on the walk from the station the May sunshine had made him feel dirty and etio- lated, a creature of indoors, with the sooty dust of London in the pores of his skin.

It occurred to him that till now she had proba- bly never seen him in broad daylight in the open.

They came to the fallen tree that she had spoken of.

The girl hopped over and forced apart the bushes, in which there did not seem to be an opening.

When Winston followed her, he found that they were in a natural clearing, a tiny grassy knoll surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely.

The girl stopped and turned.

'Here we are,' she said.

He was facing her at several paces' distance.

As yet he did not dare move nearer to her.

'I didn't want to say anything in the lane,' she went on, 'in case there's a mike hidden there.

I don't suppose there is, but there could be.

There's always the chance of one of those swine recog- nizing your voice.

We're all right here.' He still had not the courage to approach her.

'We're all right here?' he repeated stupidly.

'Yes.

Look at the trees.' They were small ashes, which at some time had been cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles, none of them thicker than one's wrist.

'There's nothing big enough to hide a mike in.

Besides, I've been here before.' They were only making conversation.

He had managed to move closer to her now.

She stood before him very upright, with a smile on her face that looked faintly ironical, as though she were wondering why he was so slow to act.

The bluebells had cascaded on to the ground.

They seemed to have fallen of their own accord.

He took her hand.

'Would you believe,' he said, 'that till this moment I didn't know what colour your eyes were?' They were brown, he noted, a rather light shade of brown, with dark lashes.

'Now that you've seen what I'm really like, can you still bear to look at me?' 'Yes, easily.' 'I'm thirty-nine years old.

I've got a wife that I can't get rid of.

I've got varicose veins.

I've got five false teeth.' 'I couldn't care less,' said the girl.

The next moment, it was hard to say by whose act, she was in his his arms.

At the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity.

The youthful body was strained against his own, the mass of dark hair was against his face, and yes!

actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing the wide red mouth.

She had clasped her arms about his neck, she was calling him darling, precious one, loved one.

He had pulled her down on to the ground, she was utterly unresisting, he could do what he liked with her.

But the truth was that he had no physical sensation, except that of mere contact.

All he felt was incredulity and pride.

He was glad that this was happening, but he had no physical desire.

It was too soon, her youth and prettiness had frightened him, he was too much used to living without women- he did not know the reason.

The girl picked herself up and pulled a bluebell out of her hair.

She sat against him, putting her arm round his waist.

'Never mind, dear.

There's no hurry.

We've got the whole after- noon.

Isn't this a splendid hide-out?

I found it when I got lost once on a community hike.

If anyone was coming you could hear them a hundred metres away.' 'What is your name?' said Winston.

'Julia.

I know yours.

It's Winston- Winston Smith.' 'How did you find that out?' 'I expect I'm better at finding things out than you are, dear.

Tell me, what did you think of me before that day I gave you the note?' He did not feel any temptation to tell lies to her.

It was even a sort of love-offering to start off by telling the worst.

'I hated the sight of you,' he said.

'I wanted to rape you and then murder you afterwards.

Two weeks ago I thought seriously of smashing your head in with a cobblestone.

If you really want to know, I imagined that you had something to do with the Thought Police.' The girl laughed delightedly, evidently taking this as a tribute to the excellence of her disguise.

'Not the Thought Police!

You didn't honestly think that?' 'Well, perhaps not exactly that.

But from your general appear- ance- merely because you're young and fresh and healthy, you understand- I thought that probably--' 'You thought I was a good Party member.

Pure in word and deed.

Banners, processions, slogans, games, community hikes all that stuff.

And you thought that if I had a quarter of a chance I'd denounce you as a thought-criminal and get you killed off?' 'Yes, something of that kind.

A great many young girls are like that, you know.' 'It's this bloody thing that does it,' she said, ripping off the scar- let sash of the Junior Anti-Sex League and flinging it on to a bough.

Then, as though touching her waist had reminded her of something, she felt in the pocket of her overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate.

She broke it in half and gave one of the pieces to Winston.

Even before he had taken it he knew by the smell that it was very unusual chocolate.

It was dark and shiny, and was wrapped in silver paper.

Chocolate normally was dull- brown crumbly stuff that tasted, as nearly as one could describe it, like the smoke of a rubbish fire.

But at some time or another he had tasted chocolate like the piece she had given him.

The first whiff of its scent had stirred up some memory which he could not pin down, but which was powerful and troubling.

'Where did you get this stuff?' he said.

'Black market,' she said indifferently.

'Actually I am that sort of girl, to look at.

I'm good at games.

I was a troop-leader in the Spies.

I do voluntary work three evenings a week for the Junior Anti-Sex League.

Hours and hours I've spent pasting their bloody rot all over London.

I always carry one end of a banner in the pro- cessions.

I always look cheerful and I never shirk anything.

Always yell with the crowd, that's what I say.

It's the only way to be safe.' The first fragment of chocolate had melted on Winston's tongue.

The taste was delightful.

But there was still that memory moving round the edges of his consciousness, something strongly felt but not reducible to definite shape, like an object seen out of the corner of one's eye.

He pushed it away from him, aware only that it was the memory of some action which he would have liked to undo but could not.

'You are very young,' he said.

'You are ten or fifteen years younger than I am.

What could you see to attract you in a man like me?' 'It was something in your face.

I thought I'd take a chance.

I'm good at spotting people who don't belong.

As soon as I saw you I knew you were against THEM.' THEM, it appeared, meant the Party, and above all the Inner Party, about whom she talked with an open jeering hatred which made Winston feel uneasy, although he knew that they were safe here if they could be safe anywhere.

A thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her language.

Party members were supposed not to swear, and Winston himself very seldom did swear, aloud, at any rate.

Julia, however, seemed unable to men- tion the Party, and especially the Inner Party, without using the kind of words that you saw chalked up in dripping alley-ways.

He did not dislike it.

It was merely one symptom of her revolt against the Party and all its ways, and somehow it seemed natural and healthy, like the sneeze of a horse that smells bad hay.

They had left the clearing and were wandering again through the chequered shade, with their arms round each other's waists whenever it was wide enough to walk two abreast.

He noticed how much softer her waist seemed to feel now that the sash was gone.

They did not speak above a whisper.

Outside the clearing, Julia said, it was better to go quietly.

Presently they had reached the edge of the little wood.

She stopped him.

'Don't go out into the open.

There might be someone watching.

We're all right if we keep behind the boughs.' They were standing in the shade of hazel bushes.

The sunlight, filtering through innumerable leaves, was still hot on their faces.

Winston looked out into the field beyond, and underwent a curi- ous, slow shock of recognition.

He knew it by sight.

An old, close-bitten pasture, with a footpath wandering across it and a molehill here and there.

In the ragged hedge on the opposite side the boughs of the elm trees swayed just perceptibly in the breeze, and their leaves stirred faintly in dense masses like women's hair.

Surely somewhere nearby, but out of sight, there must be a stream with green pools where dace were swimming?

'Isn't there a stream somewhere near here?' he whispered.

'That's right, there is a stream.

It's at the edge of the next field, actually.

There are fish in it, great big ones.

You can watch them lying in the pools under the willow trees, waving their tails.' 'It's the Golden Country- almost,' he murmured.

'The Golden Country?' 'It's nothing, really.

A landscape I've seen sometimes in a dream.' 'Look!' whispered Julia.

A thrush had alighted on a bough not five metres away, almost at the level of their faces.

Perhaps it had not seen them.

It was in the sun, they in the shade.

It spread out its wings, fitted them care- fully into place again, ducked its head for a moment, as though making a sort of obeisance to the sun, and then began to pour forth a torrent of song.

In the afternoon hush the volume of sound was startling.

Winston and Julia clung together, fascinated.

The music went on and on, minute after minute, with astonishing vari- ations, never once repeating itself, almost as though the bird were deliberately showing off its virtuosity.

Sometimes it stopped for a few seconds, spread out and resettled its wings, then swelled its speckled breast and again burst into song.

Winston watched it with a sort of vague reverence.

For whom, for what, was that bird singing?

No mate, no rival was watching it.

What made it sit at the edge of the lonely wood and pour its music into nothingness?

He wondered whether after all there was a microphone hidden somewhere near.

He and Julia had spoken only in low whispers, and it would not pick up what they had said, but it would pick up the thrush.

Perhaps at the other end of the instrument some small, beetle-like man was listening intently- listening to that.

But by degrees the flood of music drove all speculations out of his mind.

It was as though it were a kind of liquid stuff that poured all over him and got mixed up with the sunlight that filtered through the leaves.

He stopped thinking and merely felt.

The girl's waist in the bend of his arm was soft and warm.

He pulled her round so that they were breast to breast; her body seemed to melt into his.

Wherever his hands moved it was all as yielding as water.

Their mouths clung together; it was quite different from the hard kisses they had exchanged earlier.

When they moved their faces apart again both of them sighed deeply.

The bird took fright and fled with a clatter of wings.

Winston put his lips against her ear.

'NOW,' he whispered.

'Not here,' she whispered back.

'Come back to the hide-out.

It's safer.' Quickly, with an occasional crackle of twigs, they threaded their way back to the clearing.

When they were once inside the ring of saplings she turned and faced him.

They were both breath- ing fast, but the smile had reappeared round the corners of her mouth.

She stood looking at him for an instant, then felt at the zipper of her overalls.

And, yes!

it was almost as in his dream.

Almost as swiftly as he had imagined it, she had torn her clothes off, and when she flung them aside it was with that same magnifi- cent gesture by which a whole civilization seemed to be annihilated.

Her body gleamed white in the sun.

But for a moment he did not look at her body; his eyes were anchored by the freck- led face with its faint, bold smile.

He knelt down before her and took her hands in his.

'Have you done this before?' 'Of course.

Hundreds of times- well, scores of times, anyway.' 'With Party members?' 'Yes, always with Party members.' 'With members of the Inner Party?' 'Not with those swine, no.

But there's plenty that WOULD if they got half a chance.

They're not so holy as they make out.' His heart leapt.

Scores of times she had done it: he wished it had been hundreds- thousands.

Anything that hinted at corrup- tion always filled him with a wild hope.

Who knew, perhaps the Party was rotten under the surface, its cult of strenuousness and self-denial simply a sham concealing iniquity.

If he could have infected the whole lot of them with leprosy or syphilis, how gladly he would have done so!

Anything to rot, to weaken, to under- mine!

He pulled her down so that they were kneeling face to face.

'Listen.

The more men you've had, the more I love you.

Do you understand that?' 'Yes, perfectly.' 'I hate purity, I hate goodness!

I don't want any virtue to exist anywhere.

I want everyone to be corrupt to the bones.' 'Well then, I ought to suit you, dear.

I'm corrupt to the bones.' 'You like doing this?

I don't mean simply me: I mean the thing in itself?' 'I adore it.' That was above all what he wanted to hear.

Not merely the love of one person but the animal instinct, the simple undifferen- tiated desire: that was the force that would tear the Party to pieces.

He pressed her down upon the grass, among the fallen bluebells.

This time there was no difficulty.

Presently the rising and falling of their breasts slowed to normal speed, and in a sort of pleasant helplessness they fell apart.

The sun seemed to have grown hotter.

They were both sleepy.

He reached out for the dis- carded overalls and pulled them partly over her.

Almost immediately they fell asleep and slept for about half an hour.

Winston woke first.

He sat up and watched the freckled face, still peacefully asleep, pillowed on the palm of her hand.

Except for her mouth, you could not call her beautiful.

There was a line or two round the eyes, if you looked closely.

The short dark hair was extraordinarily thick and soft.

It occurred to him that he still did not know her surname or where she lived.

The young, strong body, now helpless in sleep, awoke in him a pitying, protecting feeling.

But the mindless tenderness that he had felt under the hazel tree, while the thrush was singing, had not quite come back.

He pulled the overalls aside and studied her smooth white flank.

In the old days, he thought, a man looked at a girl's body and saw that it was desirable, and that was the end of the story.

But you could not have pure love or pure lust nowa- days.

No emotion was pure, because everything was mixed up with fear and hatred.

Their embrace had been a battle, the climax a victory.

It was a blow struck against the Party.

It was a political act.

'We can come here once again,' said Julia.

'It's generally safe to use any hide-out twice.

But not for another month or two, of course.' As soon as she woke up her demeanour had changed.

She became alert and business-like, put her clothes on, knotted the scarlet sash about her waist, and began arranging the details of the journey home.

It seemed natural to leave this to her.

She obvi- ously had a practical cunning which Winston lacked, and she seemed also to have an exhaustive knowledge of the countryside round London, stored away from innumerable community hikes.

The route she gave him was quite different from the one by which he had come, and brought him out at a different railway station.

'Never go home the same way as you went out,' she said, as though enunciating an important general principle.

She would leave first, and Winston was to wait half an hour before following her.

She had named a place where they could meet after work, four evenings hence.

It was a street in one of the poorer quarters, where there was an open market which was generally crowded and noisy.

She would be hanging about among the stalls, pretend- ing to be in search of shoelaces or sewing-thread.

If she judged that the coast was clear she would blow her nose when he approached; otherwise he was to walk past her without recogni- tion.

But with luck, in the middle of the crowd, it would be safe to talk for a quarter of an hour and arrange another meeting.

'And now I must go,' she said as soon as he had mastered his instructions.

'I'm due back at nineteen-thirty.

I've got to put in two hours for the Junior Anti-Sex League, handing out leaflets, or something.

Isn't it bloody?

Give me a brush-down, would you?

Have I got any twigs in my hair?

Are you sure?

Then good-bye, my love, good-bye!' She flung herself into his arms, kissed him almost violently, and a moment later pushed her way through the saplings and disap- peared into the wood with very little noise.

Even now he had not found out her surname or her address.

However, it made no dif- ference, for it was inconceivable that they could ever meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication.

As it happened, they never went back to the clearing in the wood.

During the month of May there was only one further occa- sion on which they actually succeeded in making love.

That was in another hiding-place known to Julia, the belfry of a ruinous church in an almost-deserted stretch of country where an atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier.

It was a good hiding-place when once you got there, but the getting there was very danger- ous.

For the rest they could meet only in the streets, in a different place every evening and never for more than half an hour at a time.

In the street it was usually possible to talk, after a fashion.

As they drifted down the crowded pavements, not quite abreast and never looking at one another, they carried on a curious, inter- mittent conversation which flicked on and off like the beams of a lighthouse, suddenly nipped into silence by the approach of a Party uniform or the proximity of a telescreen, then taken up again minutes later in the middle of a sentence, then abruptly cut short as they parted at the agreed spot, then continued almost without introduction on the following day.

Julia appeared to be quite used to this kind of conversation, which she called 'talking by instalments'.

She was also surprisingly adept at speaking with- out moving her lips.

Just once in almost a month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss.

They were passing in silence down a side-street (Julia would never speak when they were away from the main streets) when there was a deafening roar, the earth heaved, and the air darkened, and Winston found himself lying on his side, bruised and terrified.

A rocket bomb must have dropped quite near at hand.

Suddenly he became aware of Julia's face a few centimetres from his own, deathly white, as white as chalk.

Even her lips were white.

She was dead!

He clasped her against him and found that he was kissing a live warm face.

But there was some powdery stuff that got in the way of his lips.

Both of their faces were thickly coated with plaster.

There were evenings when they reached their rendezvous and then had to walk past one another without a sign, because a patrol had just come round the corner or a helicopter was hover- ing overhead.

Even if it had been less dangerous, it would still have been difficult to find time to meet.

Winston's working week was sixty hours, Julia's was even longer, and their free days varied according to the pressure of work and did not often coincide.

Julia, in any case, seldom had an evening completely free.

She spent an astonishing amount of time in attending lectures and demonstrations, distributing literature for the junior Anti-Sex League, preparing banners for Hate Week, making collections for the savings campaign, and such-like activities.

It paid, she said, it was camouflage.

If you kept the small rules, you could break the big ones.

She even induced Winston to mortgage yet another of his evenings by enrolling himself for the part-time munition work which was done voluntarily by zealous Party members.

So, one evening every week, Winston spent four hours of paralysing bore- dom, screwing together small bits of metal which were probably parts of bomb fuses, in a draughty, ill-lit workshop where the knocking of hammers mingled drearily with the music of the tele- screens.

When they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmen- tary conversation were filled up.

It was a blazing afternoon.

The air in the little square chamber above the bells was hot and stag- nant, and smelt overpoweringly of pigeon dung.

They sat talking for hours on the dusty, twig-littered floor, one or other of them getting up from time to time to cast a glance through the arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming.

Julia was twenty-six years old.

She lived in a hostel with thirty other girls ('Always in the stink of women!

How I hate women!' she said parenthetically), and she worked, as he had guessed, on the novel-writing machines in the Fiction Department.

She enjoyed her work, which consisted chiefly in running and servic- ing a powerful but tricky electric motor.

She was 'not clever', but was fond of using her hands and felt at home with machinery.

She could describe the whole process of composing a novel, from the general directive issued by the Planning Committee down to the final touching-up by the Rewrite Squad.

But she was not inter- ested in the finished product.

She 'didn't much care for reading,' she said.

Books were just a commodity that had to be produced, like jam or bootlaces.

She had no memories of anything before the early sixties and the only person she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before the Revolution was a grandfather who had disap- peared when she was eight.

At school she had been captain of the hockey team and had won the gymnastics trophy two years run- ning.

She had been a troop-leader in the Spies and a branch secretary in the Youth League before joining the Junior Anti-Sex League.

She had always borne an excellent character.

She had even (an infallible mark of good reputation) been picked out to work in Pornosec, the sub-section of the Fiction Department which turned out cheap pornography for distribution among the proles.

It was nicknamed Muck House by the people who worked in it, she remarked.

There she had remained for a year, helping to produce booklets in sealed packets with titles like 'Spanking Stories' or 'One Night in a Girls' School', to be bought furtively by proletarian youths who were under the impression that they were buying something illegal.

'What are these books like?' said Winston curiously.

'Oh, ghastly rubbish.

They're boring, really.

They only have six plots, but they swap them round a bit.

Of course I was only on the kaleidoscopes.

I was never in the Rewrite Squad.

I'm not literary, dear- not even enough for that.' He learned with astonishment that all the workers in Pornosec, except the heads of the departments, were girls.

The theory was that men, whose sex instincts were less controllable than those of women, were in greater danger of being corrupted by the filth they handled.

'They don't even like having married women there,' she added.

Girls are always supposed to be so pure.

Here's one who isn't, anyway.

She had had her first love-affair when she was sixteen, with a Party member of sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest.

'And a good job too,' said Julia, 'otherwise they'd have had my name out of him when he confessed.' Since then there had been various others.

Life as she saw it was quite simple.

You wanted a good time; 'they', meaning the Party, wanted to stop you having it; you broke the rules as best you could.

She seemed to think it just as natural that 'they' should want to rob you of your pleasures as that you should want to avoid being caught.

She hated the Party, and said so in the crudest words, but she made no general criticism of it.

Except where it touched upon her own life she had no interest in Party doctrine.

He noticed that she never used Newspeak words except the ones that had passed into every- day use.

She had never heard of the Brotherhood, and refused to believe in its existence.

Any kind of organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failure, struck her as stupid.

The clever thing was to break the rules and stay alive all the same.

He wondered vaguely how many others like her there might be in the younger generation people who had grown up in the world of the Revolution, knowing nothing else, accepting the Party as some- thing unalterable, like the sky, not rebelling against its authority but simply evading it, as a rabbit dodges a dog.

They did not discuss the possibility of getting married.

It was too remote to be worth thinking about.

No imaginable committee would ever sanction such a marriage even if Katharine, Winston's wife, could somehow have been got rid of.

It was hopeless even as a daydream.

'What was she like, your wife?' said Julia.

'She was- do you know the Newspeak word GOODTHINK- FUL?

Meaning naturally orthodox, incapable of thinking a bad thought?' 'No, I didn't know the word, but I know the kind of person, right enough.' He began telling her the story of his married life, but curiously enough she appeared to know the essential parts of it already.

She described to him, almost as though she had seen or felt it, the stiff- ening of Katharine's body as soon as he touched her, the way in which she still seemed to be pushing him from her with all her strength, even when her arms were clasped tightly round him.

With Julia he felt no difficulty in talking about such things: Katharine, in any case, had long ceased to be a painful memory and became merely a distasteful one.

'I could have stood it if it hadn't been for one thing,' he said.

He told her about the frigid little ceremony that Katharine had forced him to go through on the same night every week.

'She hated it, but nothing would make her stop doing it.

She used to call it- but you'll never guess.' 'Our duty to the Party,' said Julia promptly.

'How did you know that?' 'I've been at school too, dear.

Sex talks once a month for the over-sixteens.

And in the Youth Movement.

They rub it into you for years.

I dare say it works in a lot of cases.

But of course you can never tell; people are such hypocrites.' She began to enlarge upon the subject.

With Julia, everything came back to her own sexuality.

As soon as this was touched upon in any way she was capable of great acuteness.

Unlike Winston, she had grasped the inner meaning of the Party's sexual puri- tanism.

It was not merely that the sex instinct created a world of its own which was outside the Party's control and which therefore had to be destroyed if possible.

What was more important was that sexual privation induced hysteria, which was desirable because it could be transformed into war-fever and leader-wor- ship.

The way she put it was: 'When you make love you're using up energy; and afterwards you feel happy and don't give a damn for anything.

They can't bear you to feel like that.

They want you to be bursting with energy all the time.

All this marching up and down and cheering and waving flags is simply sex gone sour.

If you're happy inside yourself, why should you get excited about Big Brother and the Three-Year Plans and the Two Minutes Hate and all the rest of their bloody rot?' That was very true, he thought.

There was a direct intimate connexion between chastity and political orthodoxy.

For how could the fear, the hatred, and the lunatic credulity which the Party needed in its members be kept at the right pitch, except by bottling down some powerful instinct and using it as a driving force?

The sex impulse was dangerous to the Party, and the Party had turned it to account.

They had played a similar trick with the instinct of parenthood.

The family could not actually be abol- ished, and, indeed, people were encouraged to be fond of their children, in almost the old-fashioned way.

The children, on the other hand, were systematically turned against their parents and taught to spy on them and report their deviations.

The family had become in effect an extension of the Thought Police.

It was a device by means of which everyone could be surrounded night and day by informers who knew him intimately.

Abruptly his mind went back to Katharine.

Katharine would unquestionably have denounced him to the Thought Police if she had not happened to be too stupid to detect the unorthodoxy of his opinions.

But what really recalled her to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon, which had brought the sweat out on his forehead.

He began telling Julia of something that had happened, or rather had failed to happen, on another sweltering summer afternoon, eleven years ago.

It was three or four months after they were married.

They had lost their way on a community hike somewhere in Kent.

They had only lagged behind the others for a couple of minutes, but they took a wrong turning, and presently found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chalk quarry.

It was a sheer drop of ten or twenty metres, with boulders at the bottom.

There was nobody of whom they could ask the way.

As soon as she realized that they were lost Katharine became very uneasy.

To be away from the noisy mob of hikers even for a moment gave her a feeling of wrong-doing.

She wanted to hurry back by the way they had come and start searching in the other direction.

But at this moment Winston noticed some tufts of loosestrife growing in the cracks of the cliff beneath them.

One tuft was of two colours, magenta and brick-red, apparently growing on the same root.

He had never seen anything of the kind before, and he called to Katharine to come and look at it.

'Look, Katharine!

Look at those flowers.

That clump down near the bottom.

Do you see they're two different colours?' She had already turned to go, but she did rather fretfully come back for a moment.

She even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he was pointing.

He was standing a little behind her, and he put his hand on her waist to steady her.

At this moment it sud- denly occurred to him how completely alone they were.

There was not a human creature anywhere, not a leaf stirring, not even a bird awake.

In a place like this the danger that there would be a hidden microphone was very small, and even if there was a microphone it would only pick up sounds.

It was the hottest sleepiest hour of the afternoon.

The sun blazed down upon them, the sweat tickled his face.

And the thought struck him...

'Why didn't you give her a good shove?' said Julia.

'I would have.' 'Yes, dear, you would have.

I would, if I'd been the same person then as I am now.

Or perhaps I would- I'm not certain.' 'Are you sorry you didn't?' 'Yes.

On the whole I'm sorry I didn't.' They were sitting side by side on the dusty floor.

He pulled her closer against him.

Her head rested on his shoulder, the pleasant smell of her hair conquering the pigeon dung.

She was very young, he thought, she still expected something from life, she did not understand that to push an inconvenient person over a cliff solves nothing.

'Actually it would have made no difference,' he said.

'Then why are you sorry you didn't do it?' 'Only because I prefer a positive to a negative.

In this game that we're playing, we can't win.

Some kinds of failure are better than other kinds, that's all.' He felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent.

She always con- tradicted him when he said anything of this kind.

She would not accept it as a law of nature that the individual is always defeated.

In a way she realized that she herself was doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police would catch her and kill her, but with another part of her mind she believed that it was somehow possi- ble to construct a secret world in which you could live as you chose.

All you needed was luck and cunning and boldness.

She did not understand that there was no such thing as happiness, that the only victory lay in the far future, long after you were dead, that from the moment of declaring war on the Party it was better to think of yourself as a corpse.

'We are the dead,' he said.

'We're not dead yet,' said Julia prosaically.

'Not physically.

Six months, a year- five years, conceivably.

I am afraid of death.

You are young, so presumably you're more afraid of it than I am.

Obviously we shall put it off as long as we can.

But it makes very little difference.

So long as human beings stay human, death and life are the same thing.' 'Oh, rubbish!

Which would you sooner sleep with, me or a skeleton?

Don't you enjoy being alive?

Don't you like feeling: This is me, this is my hand, this is my leg, I'm real, I'm solid, I'm alive!

Don't you like THIS?' She twisted herself round and pressed her bosom against him.

He could feel her breasts, ripe yet firm, through her overalls.

Her body seemed to be pouring some of its youth and vigour into his.

'Yes, I like that,' he said.

'Then stop talking about dying.

And now listen, dear, we've got to fix up about the next time we meet.

We may as well go back to the place in the wood.

We've given it a good long rest.

But you must get there by a different way this time.

I've got it all planned out.

You take the train- but look, I'll draw it out for you.' And in her practical way she scraped together a small square of dust, and with a twig from a pigeon's nest began drawing a map on the floor.

Winston looked round the shabby little room above Mr Charrington's shop.

Beside the window the enormous bed was made up, with ragged blankets and a coverless bolster.

The old- fashioned clock with the twelve-hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece.

In the corner, on the gateleg table, the glass paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly out of the half-darkness.

In the fender was a battered tin oilstove, a saucepan, and two cups, provided by Mr Charrington.

Winston lit the burner and set a pan of water to boil.

He had brought an envelope full of Victory Coffee and some saccharine tablets.

The clock's hands said seven- teen-twenty: it was nineteen-twenty really.

She was coming at nineteen-thirty.

Folly, folly, his heart kept saying: conscious, gratuitous, suicidal folly.

Of all the crimes that a Party member could commit, this one was the least possible to conceal.

Actually the idea had first floated into his head in the form of a vision, of the glass paper- weight mirrored by the surface of the gateleg table.

As he had foreseen, Mr Charrington had made no difficulty about letting the room.

He was obviously glad of the few dollars that it would bring him.

Nor did he seem shocked or become offensively know- ing when it was made clear that Winston wanted the room for the purpose of a love-affair.

Instead he looked into the middle dis- tance and spoke in generalities, with so delicate an air as to give the impression that he had become partly invisible.

Privacy, he said, was a very valuable thing.

Everyone wanted a place where they could be alone occasionally.

And when they had such a place, it was only common courtesy in anyone else who knew of it to keep his knowledge to himself.

He even, seeming almost to fade out of existence as he did so, added that there were two entries to the house, one of them through the back yard, which gave on an alley.

Under the window somebody was singing.

Winston peeped out, secure in the protection of the muslin curtain.

The June sun was still high in the sky, and in the sun-filled court below, a monstrous woman, solid as a Norman pillar, with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about her middle, was stumping to and fro between a washtub and a clothes line, pegging out a series of square white things which Winston recognized as babies' diapers.

Whenever her mouth was not corked with clothes pegs she was singing in a powerful contralto: It was only an 'opeless fancy.

It passed like an Ipril dye, But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred!

They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!

The tune had been haunting London for weeks past.

It was one of countless similar songs published for the benefit of the proles by a sub-section of the Music Department.

The words of these songs were composed without any human intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificator.

But the woman sang so tune- fully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into an almost pleasant sound.

He could hear the woman singing and the scrape of her shoes on the flagstones, and the cries of the children in the street, and somewhere in the far distance a faint roar of traffic, and yet the room seemed curiously silent, thanks to the absence of a tele- screen.

Folly, folly, folly!

he thought again.

It was inconceivable that they could frequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught.

But the temptation of having a hiding-place that was truly their own, indoors and near at hand, had been too much for both of them.

For some time after their visit to the church belfry it had been impossible to arrange meetings.

Working hours had been drastically increased in anticipation of Hate Week.

It was more than a month distant, but the enormous, complex preparations that it entailed were throwing extra work on to everybody.

Finally both of them managed to secure a free after- noon on the same day.

They had agreed to go back to the clearing in the wood.

On the evening beforehand they met briefly in the street.

As usual, Winston hardly looked at Julia as they drifted towards one another in the crowd, but from the short glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was paler than usual.

'It's all off,' she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speak.

'Tomorrow, I mean.' 'What?' 'Tomorrow afternoon.

I can't come.' 'Why not?' 'Oh, the usual reason.

It's started early this time.' For a moment he was violently angry.

During the month that he had known her the nature of his desire for her had changed.

At the beginning there had been little true sensuality in it.

Their first love-making had been simply an act of the will.

But after the second time it was different.

The smell of her hair, the taste of her mouth, the feeling of her skin seemed to have got inside him, or into the air all round him.

She had become a physical necessity, something that he not only wanted but felt that he had a right to.

When she said that she could not come, he had the feeling that she was cheating him.

But just at this moment the crowd pressed them together and their hands accidentally met.

She gave the tips of his fingers a quick squeeze that seemed to invite not desire but affection.

It struck him that when one lived with a woman this particular disappointment must be a normal, recurring event; and a deep tenderness, such as he had not felt for her before, suddenly took hold of him.

He wished that they were a married couple of ten years' standing.

He wished that he were walking through the streets with her just as they were doing now but openly and with- out fear, talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for the household.

He wished above all that they had some place where they could be alone together without feeling the obligation to make love every time they met.

It was not actually at that moment, but at some time on the following day, that the idea of renting Mr Charrington's room had occurred to him.

When he suggested it to Julia she had agreed with unexpected readiness.

Both of them knew that it was lunacy.

It was as though they were intentionally stepping nearer to their graves.

As he sat waiting on the edge of the bed he thought again of the cellars of the Ministry of Love.

It was curious how that predestined horror moved in and out of one's consciousness.

There it lay, fixed in future times, pre- ceding death as surely as 99 precedes 100.

One could not avoid it, but one could perhaps postpone it: and yet instead, every now and again, by a conscious, wilful act, one chose to shorten the interval before it happened.

At this moment there was a quick step on the stairs.

Julia burst into the room.

She was carrying a tool-bag of coarse brown canvas, such as he had sometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the Ministry.

He started forward to take her in his arms, but she disengaged herself rather hurriedly, partly because she was still holding the tool-bag.

'Half a second,' she said.

'Just let me show you what I've brought.

Did you bring some of that filthy Victory Coffee?

I thought you would.

You can chuck it away again, because we shan't be needing it.

Look here.' She fell on her knees, threw open the bag, and tumbled out some spanners and a screwdriver that filled the top part of it.

Underneath were a number of neat paper packets.

The first packet that she passed to Winston had a strange and yet vaguely familiar feeling.

It was filled with some kind of heavy, sand-like stuff which yielded wherever you touched it.

'It isn't sugar?' he said.

'Real sugar.

Not saccharine, sugar.

And here's a loaf of bread- proper white bread, not our bloody stuff- and a little pot of jam.

And here's a tin of milk- but look!

This is the one I'm really proud of.

I had to wrap a bit of sacking round it, because--' But she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up.

The smell was already filling the room, a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanation from his early childhood, but which one did occasionally meet with even now, blowing down a pas- sage-way before a door slammed, or diffusing itself mysteriously in a crowded street, sniffed for an instant and then lost again.

'It's coffee,' he murmured, 'real coffee.' 'It's Inner Party coffee.

There's a whole kilo here,' she said.

'How did you manage to get hold of all these things?' 'It's all Inner Party stuff.

There's nothing those swine don't have, nothing.

But of course waiters and servants and people pinch things, and- look, I got a little packet of tea as well.' Winston had squatted down beside her.

He tore open a corner of the packet.

'It's real tea.

Not blackberry leaves.' 'There's been a lot of tea about lately.

They've captured India, or something,' she said vaguely.

'But listen, dear.

I want you to turn your back on me for three minutes.

Go and sit on the other side of the bed.

Don't go too near the window.

And don't turn round till I tell you.' Winston gazed abstractedly through the muslin curtain.

Down in the yard the red-armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub and the line.

She took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deep feeling: They sye that time 'eals all things, They sye you can always forget; But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the years They twist my 'eart-strings yet!

She knew the whole drivelling song by heart, it seemed.

Her voice floated upward with the sweet summer air, very tuneful, charged with a sort of happy melancholy.

One had the feeling that she would have been perfectly content, if the June evening had been endless and the supply of clothes inexhaustible, to remain there for a thousand years, pegging out diapers and singing rubbish.

It struck him as a curious fact that he had never heard a member of the Party singing alone and spontaneously.

It would even have seemed slightly unorthodox, a dangerous eccentricity, like talking to oneself.

Perhaps it was only when people were somewhere near the starvation level that they had anything to sing about.

'You can turn round now,' said Julia.

He turned round, and for a second almost failed to recognize her.

What he had actually expected was to see her naked.

But she was not naked.

The transformation that had happened was much more surprising than that.

She had painted her face.

She must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian quar- ters and bought herself a complete set of make-up materials.

Her lips were deeply reddened, her cheeks rouged, her nose powdered; there was even a touch of something under the eyes to make them brighter.

It was not very skilfully done, but Winston's standards in such matters were not high.

He had never before seen or imagined a woman of the Party with cosmetics on her face.

The improve- ment in her appearance was startling.

With just a few dabs of colour in the right places she had become not only very much prettier, but, above all, far more feminine.

Her short hair and boyish overalls merely added to the effect.

As he took her in his arms a wave of synthetic violets flooded his nostrils.

He remem- bered the half-darkness of a basement kitchen, and a woman's cavernous mouth.

It was the very same scent that she had used; but at the moment it did not seem to matter.

'Scent too!' he said.

'Yes, dear, scent too.

And do you know what I'm going to do next?

I'm going to get hold of a real woman's frock from some- where and wear it instead of these bloody trousers.

I'll wear silk stockings and high-heeled shoes!

In this room I'm going to be a woman, not a Party comrade.' They flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed.

It was the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presence.

Until now he had been too much ashamed of his pale and meagre body, with the varicose veins standing out on his calves and the discoloured patch over his ankle.

There were no sheets, but the blanket they lay on was threadbare and smooth, and the size and springiness of the bed astonished both of them.

'It's sure to be full of bugs, but who cares?' said Julia.

One never saw a double bed nowadays, except in the homes of the proles.

Winston had occasionally slept in one in his boyhood: Julia had never been in one before, so far as she could remember.

Presently they fell asleep for a little while.

When Winston woke up the hands of the clock had crept round to nearly nine.

He did not stir, because Julia was sleeping with her head in the crook of his arm.

Most of her make-up had transferred itself to his own face or the bolster, but a light stain of rouge still brought out the beauty of her cheekbone.

A yellow ray from the sinking sun fell across the foot of the bed and lighted up the fireplace, where the water in the pan was boiling fast.

Down in the yard the woman had stopped singing, but the faint shouts of children floated in from the street.

He wondered vaguely whether in the abolished past it had been a normal experience to lie in bed like this, in the cool of a summer evening, a man and a woman with no clothes on, making love when they chose, talking of what they chose, not feeling any compulsion to get up, simply lying there and listening to peaceful sounds outside.

Surely there could never have been a time when that seemed ordinary?

Julia woke up, rubbed her eyes, and raised herself on her elbow to look at the oilstove.

'Half that water's boiled away,' she said.

'I'll get up and make some coffee in another moment.

We've got an hour.

What time do they cut the lights off at your flats?' 'Twenty-three thirty.' 'It's twenty-three at the hostel.

But you have to get in earlier than that, because- Hi!

Get out, you filthy brute!' She suddenly twisted herself over in the bed, seized a shoe from the floor, and sent it hurtling into the corner with a boyish jerk of her arm, exactly as he had seen her fling the dictionary at Goldstein, that morning during the Two Minutes Hate.

'What was it?' he said in surprise.

'A rat.

I saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wainscoting.

There's a hole down there.

I gave him a good fright, anyway.' 'Rats!' murmured Winston.

'In this room!' 'They're all over the place,' said Julia indifferently as she lay down again.

'We've even got them in the kitchen at the hostel.

Some parts of London are swarming with them.

Did you know they attack children?

Yes, they do.

In some of these streets a woman daren't leave a baby alone for two minutes.

It's the great huge brown ones that do it.

And the nasty thing is that the brutes always--' 'DON'T GO ON!' said Winston, with his eyes tightly shut.

'Dearest!

You've gone quite pale.

What's the matter?

Do they make you feel sick?' 'Of all horrors in the world- a rat!' She pressed herself against him and wound her limbs round him, as though to reassure him with the warmth of her body.

He did not reopen his eyes immediately.

For several moments he had had the feeling of being back in a nightmare which had recurred from time to time throughout his life.

It was always very much the same.

He was standing in front of a wall of darkness, and on the other side of it there was something unendurable, something too dreadful to be faced.

In the dream his deepest feeling was always one of self-deception, because he did in fact know what was behind the wall of darkness.

With a deadly effort, like wrenching a piece out of his own brain, he could even have dragged the thing into the open.

He always woke up without dis- covering what it was: but somehow it was connected with what Julia had been saying when he cut her short.

'I'm sorry,' he said, 'it's nothing.

I don't like rats, that's all.' 'Don't worry, dear, we're not going to have the filthy brutes in here.

I'll stuff the hole with a bit of sacking before we go.

And next time we come here I'll bring some plaster and bung it up properly.' Already the black instant of panic was half-forgotten.

Feeling slightly ashamed of himself, he sat up against the bedhead.

Julia got out of bed, pulled on her overalls, and made the coffee.

The smell that rose from the saucepan was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window lest anybody outside should notice it and become inquisitive.

What was even better than the taste of the coffee was the silky texture given to it by the sugar, a thing Winston had almost forgotten after years of saccharine.

With one hand in her pocket and a piece of bread and jam in the other, Julia wandered about the room, glancing indifferently at the bookcase, pointing out the best way of repairing the gateleg table, plumping herself down in the ragged arm-chair to see if it was comfortable, and examining the absurd twelve-hour clock with a sort of toler- ant amusement.

She brought the glass paperweight over to the bed to have a look at it in a better light.

He took it out of her hand, fascinated, as always, by the soft, rainwatery appearance of the glass.

'What is it, do you think?' said Julia.

'I don't think it's anything- I mean, I don't think it was ever put to any use.

That's what I like about it.

It's a little chunk of his- tory that they've forgotten to alter.

It's a message from a hundred years ago, if one knew how to read it.' 'And that picture over there'- she nodded at the engraving on the opposite wall- 'would that be a hundred years old?' 'More.

Two hundred, I dare say.

One can't tell.

It's impossible to discover the age of anything nowadays.' She went over to look at it.

'Here's where that brute stuck his nose out,' she said, kicking the wainscoting immediately below the picture.

'What is this place?

I've seen it before somewhere.' 'It's a church, or at least it used to be.

St Clement Danes its name was.' The fragment of rhyme that Mr Charrington had taught him came back into his head, and he added half-nostalgi- cally: "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's!"

To his astonishment she capped the line: 'You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's, When will you pay me?

say the bells of Old Bailey--' 'I can't remember how it goes on after that.

But anyway I remem- ber it ends up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head!"' It was like the two halves of a countersign.

But there must be another line after 'the bells of Old Bailey'.

Perhaps it could be dug out of Mr Charrington's memory, if he were suitably prompted.

'Who taught you that?' he said.

'My grandfather.

He used to say it to me when I was a little girl.

He was vaporized when I was eight- at any rate, he disap- peared.

I wonder what a lemon was,' she added inconsequently.

'I've seen oranges.

They're a kind of round yellow fruit with a thick skin.' 'I can remember lemons,' said Winston.

'They were quite common in the fifties.

They were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smell them.' 'I bet that picture's got bugs behind it,' said Julia.

'I'll take it down and give it a good clean some day.

I suppose it's almost time we were leaving.

I must start washing this paint off.

What a bore!

I'll get the lipstick off your face afterwards.' Winston did not get up for a few minutes more.

The room was darkening.

He turned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweight.

The inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but the interior of the glass itself.

There was such a depth of it, and yet it was almost as transparent as air.

It was as though the surface of the glass had been the arch of the sky, enclosing a tiny world with its atmosphere complete.

He had the feeling that he could get inside it, and that in fact he was inside it, along with the mahogany bed and the gateleg table, and the clock and the steel engraving and the paperweight itself.

The paperweight was the room he was in, and the coral was Julia's life and his own, fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart of the crystal.

Syme had vanished.

A morning came, and he was missing from work: a few thoughtless people commented on his absence.

On the next day nobody mentioned him.

On the third day Winston went into the vestibule of the Records Department to look at the notice-board.

One of the notices carried a printed list of the mem- bers of the Chess Committee, of whom Syme had been one.

It looked almost exactly as it had looked before- nothing had been crossed out- but it was one name shorter.

It was enough.

Syme had ceased to exist: he had never existed.

The weather was baking hot.

In the labyrinthine Ministry the windowless, air-conditioned rooms kept their normal tempera- ture, but outside the pavements scorched one's feet and the stench of the Tubes at the rush hours was a horror.

The preparations for Hate Week were in full swing, and the staffs of all the Ministries were working overtime.

Processions, meetings, military parades, lectures, waxworks, displays, film shows, telescreen programmes all had to be organized; stands had to be erected, effigies built, slo- gans coined, songs written, rumours circulated, photographs faked.

Julia's unit in the Fiction Department had been taken off the production of novels and was rushing out a series of atrocity pamphlets.

Winston, in addition to his regular work, spent long periods every day in going through back files of 'The Times' and altering and embellishing news items which were to be quoted in speeches.

Late at night, when crowds of rowdy proles roamed the streets, the town had a curiously febrile air.

The rocket bombs crashed oftener than ever, and sometimes in the far distance there were enormous explosions which no one could explain and about which there were wild rumours.

The new tune which was to be the theme-song of Hate Week (the Hate Song, it was called) had already been composed and was being endlessly plugged on the telescreens.

It had a savage, bark- ing rhythm which could not exactly be called music, but resembled the beating of a drum.

Roared out by hundreds of voices to the tramp of marching feet, it was terrifying.

The proles had taken a fancy to it, and in the midnight streets it competed with the still-popular 'It was only a hopeless fancy'.

The Parsons children played it at all hours of the night and day, unbearably, on a comb and a piece of toilet paper.

Winston's evenings were fuller than ever.

Squads of volunteers, organized by Parsons, were preparing the street for Hate Week, stitching banners, painting posters, erecting flagstaffs on the roofs, and perilously slinging wires across the street for the reception of streamers.

Parsons boasted that Victory Mansions alone would display four hundred metres of bunting.

He was in his native element and as happy as a lark.

The heat and the manual work had even given him a pre- text for reverting to shorts and an open shirt in the evenings.

He was everywhere at once, pushing, pulling, sawing, hammering, improvising, jollying everyone along with comradely exhortations and giving out from every fold of his body what seemed an inex- haustible supply of acrid-smelling sweat.

A new poster had suddenly appeared all over London.

It had no caption, and represented simply the monstrous figure of a Eurasian soldier, three or four metres high, striding forward with expressionless Mongolian face and enormous boots, a subma- chine gun pointed from his hip.

From whatever angle you looked at the poster, the muzzle of the gun, magnified by the foreshort- ening, seemed to be pointed straight at you.

The thing had been plastered on every blank space on every wall, even outnumbering the portraits of Big Brother.

The proles, normally apathetic about the war, were being lashed into one of their periodical frenzies of patriotism.

As though to harmonize with the general mood, the rocket bombs had been killing larger numbers of people than usual.

One fell on a crowded film theatre in Stepney, burying sev- eral hundred victims among the ruins.

The whole population of the neighbourhood turned out for a long, trailing funeral which went on for hours and was in effect an indignation meeting.

Another bomb fell on a piece of waste ground which was used as a playground and several dozen children were blown to pieces.

There were further angry demonstrations, Goldstein was burned in effigy, hundreds of copies of the poster of the Eurasian soldier were torn down and added to the flames, and a number of shops were looted in the turmoil; then a rumour flew round that spies were directing the rocket bombs by means of wireless waves, and an old couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction had their house set on fire and perished of suffocation.

In the room over Mr Charrington's shop, when they could get there, Julia and Winston lay side by side on a stripped bed under the open window, naked for the sake of coolness.

The rat had never come back, but the bugs had multiplied hideously in the heat.

It did not seem to matter.

Dirty or clean, the room was par- adise.

As soon as they arrived they would sprinkle everything with pepper bought on the black market, tear off their clothes, and make love with sweating bodies, then fall asleep and wake to find that the bugs had rallied and were massing for the counter-attack.

Four, five, six- seven times they met during the month of June.

Winston had dropped his habit of drinking gin at all hours.

He seemed to have lost the need for it.

He had grown fatter, his vari- cose ulcer had subsided, leaving only a brown stain on the skin above his ankle, his fits of coughing in the early morning had stopped.

The process of life had ceased to be intolerable, he had no longer any impulse to make faces at the telescreen or shout curses at the top of his voice.

Now that they had a secure hiding- place, almost a home, it did not even seem a hardship that they could only meet infrequently and for a couple of hours at a time.

What mattered was that the room over the junk-shop should exist.

To know that it was there, inviolate, was almost the same as being in it.

The room was a world, a pocket of the past where extinct animals could walk.

Mr Charrington, thought Winston, was another extinct animal.

He usually stopped to talk with Mr Charrington for a few minutes on his way upstairs.

The old man seemed seldom or never to go out of doors, and on the other hand to have almost no customers.

He led a ghostlike existence between the tiny, dark shop, and an even tinier back kitchen where he pre- pared his meals and which contained, among other things, an unbelievably ancient gramophone with an enormous horn.

He seemed glad of the opportunity to talk.

Wandering about among his worthless stock, with his long nose and thick spectacles and his bowed shoulders in the velvet jacket, he had always vaguely the air of being a collector rather than a tradesman.

With a sort of faded enthusiasm he would finger this scrap of rubbish or that- a china bottle-stopper, the painted lid of a broken snuffbox, a pinchbeck locket containing a strand of some long-dead baby's hair- never asking that Winston should buy it, merely that he should admire it.

To talk to him was like listening to the tinkling of a worn-out musical-box.

He had dragged out from the corners of his memory some more fragments of forgotten rhymes.

There was one about four and twenty blackbirds, and another about a cow with a crumpled horn, and another about the death of poor Cock Robin.

'It just occurred to me you might be interested,' he would say with a deprecating little laugh whenever he produced a new fragment.

But he could never recall more than a few lines of any one rhyme.

Both of them knew- in a way, it was never out of their minds that what was now happening could not last long.

There were times when the fact of impending death seemed as palpable as the bed they lay on, and they would cling together with a sort of despairing sensuality, like a damned soul grasping at his last morsel of pleasure when the clock is within five minutes of strik- ing.

But there were also times when they had the illusion not only of safety but of permanence.

So long as they were actually in this room, they both felt, no harm could come to them.

Getting there was difficult and dangerous, but the room itself was sanctuary.

It was as when Winston had gazed into the heart of the paper- weight, with the feeling that it would be possible to get inside that glassy world, and that once inside it time could be arrested.

Often they gave themselves up to daydreams of escape.

Their luck would hold indefinitely, and they would carry on their intrigue, just like this, for the remainder of their natural lives.

Or Katharine would die, and by subtle manoeuvrings Winston and Julia would succeed in getting married.

Or they would commit suicide together.

Or they would disappear, alter themselves out of recognition, learn to speak with proletarian accents, get jobs in a factory and live out their lives undetected in a back-street.

It was all nonsense, as they both knew.

In reality there was no escape.

Even the one plan that was practicable, suicide, they had no intention of carrying out.

To hang on from day to day and from week to week, spinning out a present that had no future, seemed an unconquerable instinct, just as one's lungs will always draw the next breath so long as there is air available.

Sometimes, too, they talked of engaging in active rebellion against the Party, but with no notion of how to take the first step.

Even if the fabulous Brotherhood was a reality, there still remained the difficulty of finding one's way into it.

He told her of the strange intimacy that existed, or seemed to exist, between himself and O'Brien, and of the impulse he sometimes felt, simply to walk into O'Brien's presence, announce that he was the enemy of the Party, and demand his help.

Curiously enough, this did not strike her as an impossibly rash thing to do.

She was used to judg- ing people by their faces, and it seemed natural to her that Winston should believe O'Brien to be trustworthy on the strength of a single flash of the eyes.

Moreover she took it for granted that everyone, or nearly everyone, secretly hated the Party and would break the rules if he thought it safe to do so.

But she refused to believe that widespread, organized opposition existed or could exist.

The tales about Goldstein and his underground army, she said, were simply a lot of rubbish which the Party had invented for its own purposes and which you had to pretend to believe in.

Times beyond number, at Party rallies and spontaneous demon- strations, she had shouted at the top of her voice for the execution of people whose names she had never heard and in whose sup- posed crimes she had not the faintest belief.

When public trials were happening she had taken her place in the detachments from the Youth League who surrounded the courts from morning to night, chanting at intervals 'Death to the traitors!' During the Two Minutes Hate she always excelled all others in shouting insults at Goldstein.

Yet she had only the dimmest idea of who Goldstein was and what doctrines he was supposed to represent.

She had grown up since the Revolution and was too young to remember the ideological battles of the fifties and sixties.

Such a thing as an independent political movement was outside her imagination: and in any case the Party was invincible.

It would always exist, and it would always be the same.

You could only rebel against it by secret disobedience or, at most, by isolated acts of violence such as killing somebody or blowing something up.

In some ways she was far more acute than Winston, and far less susceptible to Party propaganda.

Once when he happened in some connexion to mention the war against Eurasia, she startled him by saying casually that in her opinion the war was not happening.

The rocket bombs which fell daily on London were probably fired by the Government of Oceania itself, 'just to keep people fright- ened'.

This was an idea that had literally never occurred to him.

She also stirred a sort of envy in him by telling him that during the Two Minutes Hate her great difficulty was to avoid bursting out laughing.

But she only questioned the teachings of the Party when they in some way touched upon her own life.

Often she was ready to accept the official mythology, simply because the difference between truth and falsehood did not seem important to her.

She believed, for instance, having learnt it at school, that the Party had invented aeroplanes.

(In his own schooldays, Winston remem- bered, in the late fifties, it was only the helicopter that the Party claimed to have invented; a dozen years later, when Julia was at school, it was already claiming the aeroplane; one generation more, and it would be claiming the steam engine.) And when he told her that aeroplanes had been in existence before he was born and long before the Revolution, the fact struck her as totally unin- teresting.

After all, what did it matter who had invented aeroplanes?

It was rather more of a shock to him when he dis- covered from some chance remark that she did not remember that Oceania, four years ago, had been at war with Eastasia and at peace with Eurasia.

It was true that she regarded the whole war as a sham: but apparently she had not even noticed that the name of the enemy had changed.

'I thought we'd always been at war with Eurasia,' she said vaguely.

It frightened him a little.

The invention of aeroplanes dated from long before her birth, but the switchover in the war had happened only four years ago, well after she was grown up.

He argued with her about it for perhaps a quarter of an hour.

In the end he succeeded in forcing her memory back until she did dimly recall that at one time Eastasia and not Eurasia had been the enemy.

But the issue still struck her as unimportant.

'Who cares?' she said impatiently.

'It's always one bloody war after another, and one knows the news is all lies anyway.' Sometimes he talked to her of the Records Department and the impudent forgeries that he committed there.

Such things did not appear to horrify her.

She did not feel the abyss opening beneath her feet at the thought of lies becoming truths.

He told her the story of Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford and the momentous slip of paper which he had once held between his fingers.

It did not make much impression on her.

At first, indeed, she failed to grasp the point of the story.

'Were they friends of yours?' she said.

'No, I never knew them.

They were Inner Party members.

Besides, they were far older men than I was.

They belonged to the old days, before the Revolution.

I barely knew them by sight.' 'Then what was there to worry about?

People are being killed off all the time, aren't they?' He tried to make her understand.

'This was an exceptional case.

It wasn't just a question of somebody being killed.

Do you realize that the past, starting from yesterday, has been actually abolished?

If it survives anywhere, it's in a few solid objects with no words attached to them, like that lump of glass there.

Already we know almost literally nothing about the Revolution and the years before the Revolution.

Every record has been destroyed or falsified, every book has been rewritten, every picture has been repainted, every statue and street and building has been renamed, every date has been altered.

And that process is continuing day by day and minute by minute.

History has stopped.

Nothing exists except an endless present in which the Party is always right.

I know, of course, that the past is falsified, but it would never be possible for me to prove it, even when I did the falsification myself.

After the thing is done, no evidence ever remains.

The only evidence is inside my own mind, and I don't know with any cer- tainty that any other human being shares my memories.

Just in that one instance, in my whole life, I did possess actual concrete evidence after the event- years after it.' 'And what good was that?' 'It was no good, because I threw it away a few minutes later.

But if the same thing happened today, I should keep it.' 'Well, I wouldn't!' said Julia.

'I'm quite ready to take risks, but only for something worth while, not for bits of old newspaper.

What could you have done with it even if you had kept it?' 'Not much, perhaps.

But it was evidence.

It might have planted a few doubts here and there, supposing that I'd dared to show it to anybody.

I don't imagine that we can alter anything in our own lifetime.

But one can imagine little knots of resistance springing up here and there- small groups of people banding themselves together, and gradually growing, and even leaving a few records behind, so that the next generations can carry on where we leave off.' 'I'm not interested in the next generation, dear.

I'm interested in US.' 'You're only a rebel from the waist downwards,' he told her.

She thought this brilliantly witty and flung her arms round him in delight.

In the ramifications of party doctrine she had not the faintest interest.

Whenever he began to talk of the principles of Ingsoc, doublethink, the mutability of the past, and the denial of objective reality, and to use Newspeak words, she became bored and con- fused and said that she never paid any attention to that kind of thing.

One knew that it was all rubbish, so why let oneself be wor- ried by it?

She knew when to cheer and when to boo, and that was all one needed.

If he persisted in talking of such subjects, she had a disconcerting habit of falling asleep.

She was one of those people who can go to sleep at any hour and in any position.

Talking to her, he realized how easy it was to present an appear- ance of orthodoxy while having no grasp whatever of what orthodoxy meant.

In a way, the world-view of the Party imposed itself most successfully on people incapable of understanding it.

They could be made to accept the most flagrant violations of real- ity, because they never fully grasped the enormity of what was demanded of them, and were not sufficiently interested in public events to notice what was happening.

By lack of understanding they remained sane.

They simply swallowed everything, and what they swallowed did them no harm, because it left no residue behind, just as a grain of corn will pass undigested through the body of a bird.

It had happened at last.

The expected message had come.

All his life, it seemed to him, he had been waiting for this to happen.

He was walking down the long corridor at the Ministry and he was almost at the spot where Julia had slipped the note into his hand when he became aware that someone larger than himself was walking just behind him.

The person, whoever it was, gave a small cough, evidently as a prelude to speaking.

Winston stopped abruptly and turned.

It was O'Brien.

At last they were face to face, and it seemed that his only impulse was to run away.

His heart bounded violently.

He would have been incapable of speaking.

O'Brien, however, had contin- ued forward in the same movement, laying a friendly hand for a moment on Winston's arm, so that the two of them were walking side by side.

He began speaking with the peculiar grave courtesy that differentiated him from the majority of Inner Party members.

'I had been hoping for an opportunity of talking to you,' he said.

'I was reading one of your Newspeak articles in 'The Times' the other day.

You take a scholarly interest in Newspeak, I believe?' Winston had recovered part of his self-possession.

'Hardly scholarly,' he said.

'I'm only an amateur.

It's not my subject.

I have never had anything to do with the actual construction of the lan- guage.' 'But you write it very elegantly,' said O'Brien.

'That is not only my own opinion.

I was talking recently to a friend of yours who is certainly an expert.

His name has slipped my memory for the moment.' Again Winston's heart stirred painfully.

It was inconceivable that this was anything other than a reference to Syme.

But Syme was not only dead, he was abolished, an unperson.

Any identifi- able reference to him would have been mortally dangerous.

O'Brien's remark must obviously have been intended as a signal, a codeword.

By sharing a small act of thoughtcrime he had turned the two of them into accomplices.

They had continued to stroll slowly down the corridor, but now O'Brien halted.

With the curi- ous, disarming friendliness that he always managed to put in to the gesture he resettled his spectacles on his nose.

Then he went on: 'What I had really intended to say was that in your article I noticed you had used two words which have become obsolete.

But they have only become so very recently.

Have you seen the tenth edition of the Newspeak Dictionary?' 'No,' said Winston.

'I didn't think it had been issued yet.

We are still using the ninth in the Records Department.' 'The tenth edition is not due to appear for some months, I believe.

But a few advance copies have been circulated.

I have one myself.

It might interest you to look at it, perhaps?' 'Very much so,' said Winston, immediately seeing where this tended.

'Some of the new developments are most ingenious.

The reduc- tion in the number of verbs- that is the point that will appeal to you, I think.

Let me see, shall I send a messenger to you with the dictionary?

But I am afraid I invariably forget anything of that kind.

Perhaps you could pick it up at my flat at some time that suited you?

Wait.

Let me give you my address.' They were standing in front of a telescreen.

Somewhat absent- mindedly O'Brien felt two of his pockets and then produced a small leather-covered notebook and a gold ink-pencil.

Immediately beneath the telescreen, in such a position that anyone who was watching at the other end of the instrument could read what he was writing, he scribbled an address, tore out the page and handed it to Winston.

'I am usually at home in the evenings,' he said.

'If not, my ser- vant will give you the dictionary.' He was gone, leaving Winston holding the scrap of paper, which this time there was no need to conceal.

Nevertheless he carefully memorized what was written on it, and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole along with a mass of other papers.

They had been talking to one another for a couple of minutes at the most.

There was only one meaning that the episode could possibly have.

It had been contrived as a way of letting Winston know O'Brien's address.

This was necessary, because except by direct enquiry it was never possible to discover where anyone lived.

There were no directories of any kind.

'If you ever want to see me, this is where I can be found,' was what O'Brien had been saying to him.

Perhaps there would even be a message concealed somewhere in the dictionary.

But at any rate, one thing was cer- tain.

The conspiracy that he had dreamed of did exist, and he had reached the outer edges of it.

He knew that sooner or later he would obey O'Brien's sum- mons.

Perhaps tomorrow, perhaps after a long delay- he was not certain.

What was happening was only the working-out of a process that had started years ago.

The first step had been a secret, involuntary thought, the second had been the opening of the diary.

He had moved from thoughts to words, and now from words to actions.

The last step was something that would happen in the Ministry of Love.

He had accepted it.

The end was con- tained in the beginning.

But it was frightening: or, more exactly, it was like a foretaste of death, like being a little less alive.

Even while he was speaking to O'Brien, when the meaning of the words had sunk in, a chilly shuddering feeling had taken possession of his body.

He had the sensation of stepping into the dampness of a grave, and it was not much better because he had always known that the grave was there and waiting for him.

Winston had woken up with his eyes full of tears.

Julia rolled sleepily against him, murmuring something that might have been 'What's the matter?' 'I dreamt- ' he began, and stopped short.

It was too complex to be put into words.

There was the dream itself, and there was a memory connected with it that had swum into his mind in the few seconds after waking.

He lay back with his eyes shut, still sodden in the atmosphere of the dream.

It was a vast, luminous dream in which his whole life seemed to stretch out before him like a landscape on a summer evening after rain.

It had all occurred inside the glass paperweight, but the surface of the glass was the dome of the sky, and inside the dome everything was flooded with clear soft light in which one could see into interminable distances.

The dream had also been comprehended by- indeed, in some sense it had consisted in- a gesture of the arm made by his mother, and made again thirty years later by the Jewish woman he had seen on the news film, trying to shelter the small boy from the bullets, before the heli- copter blew them both to pieces.

'Do you know,' he said, 'that until this moment I believed I had murdered my mother?' 'Why did you murder her?' said Julia, almost asleep.

'I didn't murder her.

Not physically.' In the dream he had remembered his last glimpse of his mother, and within a few moments of waking the cluster of small events surrounding it had all come back.

It was a memory that he must have deliberately pushed out of his consciousness over many years.

He was not certain of the date, but he could not have been less than ten years old, possibly twelve, when it had happened.

His father had disappeared some time earlier, how much earlier he could not remember.

He remembered better the rackety, uneasy circumstances of the time: the periodical panics about air-raids and the sheltering in Tube stations, the piles of rubble everywhere, the unintelligible proclamations posted at street corners, the gangs of youths in shirts all the same colour, the enormous queues out- side the bakeries, the intermittent machine-gun fire in the distance- above all, the fact that there was never enough to eat.

He remembered long afternoons spent with other boys in scroung- ing round dustbins and rubbish heaps, picking out the ribs of cabbage leaves, potato peelings, sometimes even scraps of stale breadcrust from which they carefully scraped away the cinders; and also in waiting for the passing of trucks which travelled over a certain route and were known to carry cattle feed, and which, when they jolted over the bad patches in the road, sometimes spilt a few fragments of oil-cake.

When his father disappeared, his mother did not show any sur- prise or any violent grief, but a sudden change came over her.

She seemed to have become completely spiritless.

It was evident even to Winston that she was waiting for something that she knew must happen.

She did everything that was needed- cooked, washed, mended, made the bed, swept the floor, dusted the man- telpiece- always very slowly and with a curious lack of superfluous motion, like an artist's lay-figure moving of its own accord.

Her large shapely body seemed to relapse naturally into stillness.

For hours at a time she would sit almost immobile on the bed, nursing his young sister, a tiny, ailing, very silent child of two or three, with a face made simian by thinness.

Very occasionally she would take Winston in her arms and press him against her for a long time without saying anything.

He was aware, in spite of his youthfulness and selfishness, that this was somehow connected with the never-mentioned thing that was about to happen.

He remembered the room where they lived, a dark, close- smelling room that seemed half filled by a bed with a white counterpane.

There was a gas ring in the fender, and a shelf where food was kept, and on the landing outside there was a brown earthenware sink, common to several rooms.

He remembered his mother's statuesque body bending over the gas ring to stir at something in a saucepan.

Above all he remembered his continuous hunger, and the fierce sordid battles at mealtimes.

He would ask his mother naggingly, over and over again, why there was not more food, he would shout and storm at her (he even remembered the tones of his voice, which was beginning to break prematurely and sometimes boomed in a peculiar way), or he would attempt a snivelling note of pathos in his efforts to get more than his share.

His mother was quite ready to give him more than his share.

She took it for granted that he, 'the boy', should have the biggest por- tion; but however much she gave him he invariably demanded more.

At every meal she would beseech him not to be selfish and to remember that his little sister was sick and also needed food, but it was no use.

He would cry out with rage when she stopped ladling, he would try to wrench the saucepan and spoon out of her hands, he would grab bits from his sister's plate.

He knew that he was starving the other two, but he could not help it; he even felt that he had a right to do it.

The clamorous hunger in his belly seemed to justify him.

Between meals, if his mother did not stand guard, he was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the shelf.

One day a chocolate ration was issued.

There had been no such issue for weeks or months past.

He remembered quite clearly that precious little morsel of chocolate.

It was a two-ounce slab (they still talked about ounces in those days) between the three of them.

It was obvious that it ought to be divided into three equal parts.

Suddenly, as though he were listening to somebody else, Winston heard himself demanding in a loud booming voice that he should be given the whole piece.

His mother told him not to be greedy.

There was a long, nagging argument that went round and round, with shouts, whines, tears, remonstrances, bargainings.

His tiny sister, clinging to her mother with both hands, exactly like a baby monkey, sat looking over her shoulder at him with large, mourn- ful eyes.

In the end his mother broke off three-quarters of the chocolate and gave it to Winston, giving the other quarter to his sister.

The little girl took hold of it and looked at it dully, perhaps not knowing what it was.

Winston stood watching her for a moment.

Then with a sudden swift spring he had snatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister's hand and was fleeing for the door.

'Winston, Winston!' his mother called after him.

'Come back!

Give your sister back her chocolate!' He stopped, but did not come back.

His mother's anxious eyes were fixed on his face.

Even now he was thinking about the thing, he did not know what it was that was on the point of happening.

His sister, conscious of having been robbed of something, had set up a feeble wail.

His mother drew her arm round the child and pressed its face against her breast.

Something in the gesture told him that his sister was dying.

He turned and fled down the stairs, with the chocolate growing sticky in his hand.

He never saw his mother again.

After he had devoured the chocolate he felt somewhat ashamed of himself and hung about in the streets for several hours, until hunger drove him home.

When he came back his mother had disappeared.

This was already becoming normal at that time.

Nothing was gone from the room except his mother and his sister.

They had not taken any clothes, not even his mother's overcoat.

To this day he did not know with any certainty that his mother was dead.

It was perfectly possible that she had merely been sent to a forced-labour camp.

As for his sister, she might have been removed, like Winston himself, to one of the colonies for homeless children (Reclamation Centres, they were called) which had grown up as a result of the civil war, or she might have been sent to the labour camp along with his mother, or simply left somewhere or other to die.

The dream was still vivid in his mind, especially the enveloping protecting gesture of the arm in which its whole meaning seemed to be contained.

His mind went back to another dream of two months ago.

Exactly as his mother had sat on the dingy white- quilted bed, with the child clinging to her, so she had sat in the sunken ship, far underneath him, and drowning deeper every minute, but still looking up at him through the darkening water.

He told Julia the story of his mother's disappearance.

Without opening her eyes she rolled over and settled herself into a more comfortable position.

'I expect you were a beastly little swine in those days,' she said indistinctly.

'All children are swine.' 'Yes.

But the real point of the story--' From her breathing it was evident that she was going off to sleep again.

He would have liked to continue talking about his mother.

He did not suppose, from what he could remember of her, that she had been an unusual woman, still less an intelligent one; and yet she had possessed a kind of nobility, a kind of purity, simply because the standards that she obeyed were private ones.

Her feelings were her own, and could not be altered from outside.

It would not have occurred to her that an action which is ineffec- tual thereby becomes meaningless.

If you loved someone, you loved him, and when you had nothing else to give, you still gave him love.

When the last of the chocolate was gone, his mother had clasped the child in her arms.

It was no use, it changed nothing, it did not produce more chocolate, it did not avert the child's death or her own; but it seemed natural to her to do it.

The refugee woman in the boat had also covered the little boy with her arm, which was no more use against the bullets than a sheet of paper.

The terrible thing that the Party had done was to persuade you that mere impulses, mere feelings, were of no account, while at the same time robbing you of all power over the material world.

When once you were in the grip of the Party, what you felt or did not feel, what you did or refrained from doing, made literally no difference.

Whatever happened you vanished, and neither you nor your actions were ever heard of again.

You were lifted clean out of the stream of history.

And yet to the people of only two gener- ations ago this would not have seemed all-important, because they were not attempting to alter history.

They were governed by pri- vate loyalties which they did not question.

What mattered were individual relationships, and a completely helpless gesture, an embrace, a tear, a word spoken to a dying man, could have value in itself.

The proles, it suddenly occurred to him, had remained in this condition.

They were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea, they were loyal to one another.

For the first time in his life he did not despise the proles or think of them merely as an inert force which would one day spring to life and regenerate the world.

The proles had stayed human.

They had not become hardened inside.

They had held on to the primitive emotions which he himself had to re-learn by conscious effort.

And in thinking this he remem- bered, without apparent relevance, how a few weeks ago he had seen a severed hand lying on the pavement and had kicked it into the gutter as though it had been a cabbage-stalk.

'The proles are human beings,' he said aloud.

'We are not human.' 'Why not?' said Julia, who had woken up again.

He thought for a little while.

'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said, 'that the best thing for us to do would be simply to walk out of here before it's too late, and never see each other again?' 'Yes, dear, it has occurred to me, several times.

But I'm not going to do it, all the same.' 'We've been lucky,' he said 'but it can't last much longer.

You're young.

You look normal and innocent.

If you keep clear of people like me, you might stay alive for another fifty years.' 'No.

I've thought it all out.

What you do, I'm going to do.

And don't be too downhearted.

I'm rather good at staying alive.' 'We may be together for another six months- a year- there's no knowing.

At the end we're certain to be apart.

Do you realize how utterly alone we shall be?

When once they get hold of us there will be nothing, literally nothing, that either of us can do for the other.

If I confess, they'll shoot you, and if I refuse to confess, they'll shoot you just the same.

Nothing that I can do or say, or stop myself from saying, will put off your death for as much as five minutes.

Neither of us will even know whether the other is alive or dead.

We shall be utterly without power of any kind.

The one thing that matters is that we shouldn't betray one another, although even that can't make the slightest difference.' 'If you mean confessing,' she said, 'we shall do that, right enough.

Everybody always confesses.

You can't help it.

They tor- ture you.' 'I don't mean confessing.

Confession is not betrayal.

What you say or do doesn't matter: only feelings matter.

If they could make me stop loving you- that would be the real betrayal.' She thought it over.

'They can't do that,' she said finally.

'It's the one thing they can't do.

They can make you say anything- ANYTHING- but they can't make you believe it.

They can't get inside you.' 'No,' he said a little more hopefully, 'no; that's quite true.

They can't get inside you.

If you can FEEL that staying human is worth while, even when it can't have any result whatever, you've beaten them.' He thought of the telescreen with its never-sleeping ear.

They could spy upon you night and day, but if you kept your head you could still outwit them.

With all their cleverness they had never mastered the secret of finding out what another human being was thinking.

Perhaps that was less true when you were actually in their hands.

One did not know what happened inside the Ministry of Love, but it was possible to guess: tortures, drugs, delicate instruments that registered your nervous reactions, gradual wear- ing-down by sleeplessness and solitude and persistent questioning.

Facts, at any rate, could not be kept hidden.

They could be tracked down by enquiry, they could be squeezed out of you by torture.

But if the object was not to stay alive but to stay human, what difference did it ultimately make?

They could not alter your feelings: for that matter you could not alter them yourself, even if you wanted to.

They could lay bare in the utmost detail every- thing that you had done or said or thought; but the inner heart, whose workings were mysterious even to yourself, remained impregnable.

They had done it, they had done it at last!

The room they were standing in was long-shaped and softly lit.

The telescreen was dimmed to a low murmur; the richness of the dark-blue carpet gave one the impression of treading on velvet.

At the far end of the room O'Brien was sitting at a table under a green-shaded lamp, with a mass of papers on either side of him.

He had not bothered to look up when the servant showed Julia and Winston in.

Winston's heart was thumping so hard that he doubted whether he would be able to speak.

They had done it, they had done it at last, was all he could think.

It had been a rash act to come here at all, and sheer folly to arrive together; though it was true that they had come by different routes and only met on O'Brien's doorstep.

But merely to walk into such a place needed an effort of the nerve.

It was only on very rare occasions that one saw inside the dwelling-places of the Inner Party, or even penetrated into the quarter of the town where they lived.

The whole atmosphere of the huge block of flats, the richness and spaciousness of every- thing, the unfamiliar smells of good food and good tobacco, the silent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down, the white- jacketed servants hurrying to and fro- everything was intimidating.

Although he had a good pretext for coming here, he was haunted at every step by the fear that a black-uniformed guard would suddenly appear from round the corner, demand his papers, and order him to get out.

O'Brien's servant, however, had admitted the two of them without demur.

He was a small, dark- haired man in a white jacket, with a diamond-shaped, completely expressionless face which might have been that of a Chinese.

The passage down which he led them was softly carpeted, with cream- papered walls and white wainscoting, all exquisitely clean.

That too was intimidating.

Winston could not remember ever to have seen a passageway whose walls were not grimy from the contact of human bodies.

O'Brien had a slip of paper between his fingers and seemed to be studying it intently.

His heavy face, bent down so that one could see the line of the nose, looked both formidable and intelli- gent.

For perhaps twenty seconds he sat without stirring.

Then he pulled the speakwrite towards him and rapped out a message in the hybrid jargon of the Ministries: 'Items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise stop suggestion contained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethink cancel stop unproceed constructionwise antegetting plusfull estimates machinery overheads stop end message.' He rose deliberately from his chair and came towards them across the soundless carpet.

A little of the official atmosphere seemed to have fallen away from him with the Newspeak words, but his expression was grimmer than usual, as though he were not pleased at being disturbed.

The terror that Winston already felt was suddenly shot through by a streak of ordinary embarrass- ment.

It seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made a stupid mistake.

For what evidence had he in reality that O'Brien was any kind of political conspirator?

Nothing but a flash of the eyes and a single equivocal remark: beyond that, only his own secret imaginings, founded on a dream.

He could not even fall back on the pretence that he had come to borrow the dictionary, because in that case Julia's presence was impossible to explain.

As O'Brien passed the telescreen a thought seemed to strike him.

He stopped, turned aside and pressed a switch on the wall.

There was a sharp snap.

The voice had stopped.

Julia uttered a tiny sound, a sort of squeak of surprise.

Even in the midst of his panic, Winston was too much taken aback to be able to hold his tongue.

'You can turn it off!' he said.

'Yes,' said O'Brien, 'we can turn it off.

We have that privilege.' He was opposite them now.

His solid form towered over the pair of them, and the expression on his face was still indecipher- able.

He was waiting, somewhat sternly, for Winston to speak, but about what?

Even now it was quite conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering irritably why he had been inter- rupted.

Nobody spoke.

After the stopping of the telescreen the room seemed deadly silent.

The seconds marched past, enormous.

With difficulty Winston continued to keep his eyes fixed on O'Brien's.

Then suddenly the grim face broke down into what might have been the beginnings of a smile.

With his characteristic gesture O'Brien resettled his spectacles on his nose.

'Shall I say it, or will you?' he said.

'I will say it,' said Winston promptly.

'That thing is really turned off?' 'Yes, everything is turned off.

We are alone.' 'We have come here because--' He paused, realizing for the first time the vagueness of his own motives.

Since he did not in fact know what kind of help he expected from O'Brien, it was not easy to say why he had come here.

He went on, conscious that what he was saying must sound both feeble and pretentious: 'We believe that there is some kind of conspiracy, some kind of secret organization working against the Party, and that you are involved in it.

We want to join it and work for it.

We are enemies of the Party.

We disbelieve in the principles of Ingsoc.

We are thought-criminals.

We are also adulterers.

I tell you this because we want to put ourselves at your mercy.

If you want us to incrim- inate ourselves in any other way, we are ready.' He stopped and glanced over his shoulder, with the feeling that the door had opened.

Sure enough, the little yellow-faced servant had come in without knocking.

Winston saw that he was carrying a tray with a decanter and glasses.

'Martin is one of us,' said O'Brien impassively.

'Bring the drinks over here, Martin.

Put them on the round table.

Have we enough chairs?

Then we may as well sit down and talk in comfort.

Bring a chair for yourself, Martin.

This is business.

You can stop being a servant for the next ten minutes.' The little man sat down, quite at his ease, and yet still with a servant-like air, the air of a valet enjoying a privilege.

Winston regarded him out of the corner of his eye.

It struck him that the man's whole life was playing a part, and that he felt it to be dan- gerous to drop his assumed personality even for a moment.

O'Brien took the decanter by the neck and filled up the glasses with a dark-red liquid.

It aroused in Winston dim memories of something seen long ago on a wall or a hoarding- a vast bottle composed of electric lights which seemed to move up and down and pour its contents into a glass.

Seen from the top the stuff looked almost black, but in the decanter it gleamed like a ruby.

It had a sour-sweet smell.

He saw Julia pick up her glass and sniff at it with frank curiosity.

'It is called wine,' said O'Brien with a faint smile.

'You will have read about it in books, no doubt.

Not much of it gets to the Outer Party, I am afraid.' His face grew solemn again, and he raised his glass: 'I think it is fitting that we should begin by drink- ing a health.

To our Leader: To Emmanuel Goldstein.' Winston took up his glass with a certain eagerness.

Wine was a thing he had read and dreamed about.

Like the glass paperweight or Mr Charrington's half-remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, the olden time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts.

For some reason he had always thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste, like that of blackberry jam and an immediate intoxicating effect.

Actually, when he came to swal- low it, the stuff was distinctly disappointing.

The truth was that after years of gin-drinking he could barely taste it.

He set down the empty glass.

'Then there is such a person as Goldstein?' he said.

'Yes, there is such a person, and he is alive.

Where, I do not know.' 'And the conspiracy- the organization?

Is it real?

It is not simply an invention of the Thought Police?' 'No, it is real.

The Brotherhood, we call it.

You will never learn much more about the Brotherhood than that it exists and that you belong to it.

I will come back to that presently.' He looked at his wrist-watch.

'It is unwise even for members of the Inner Party to turn off the telescreen for more than half an hour.

You ought not to have come here together, and you will have to leave separately.

You, comrade'- he bowed his head to Julia- 'will leave first.

We have about twenty minutes at our disposal.

You will understand that I must start by asking you certain questions.

In general terms, what are you prepared to do?' 'Anything that we are capable of,' said Winston.

O'Brien had turned himself a little in his chair so that he was facing Winston.

He almost ignored Julia, seeming to take it for granted that Winston could speak for her.

For a moment the lids flitted down over his eyes.

He began asking his questions in a low, expressionless voice, as though this were a routine, a sort of cate- chism, most of whose answers were known to him already.

'You are prepared to give your lives?' 'Yes.' 'You are prepared to commit murder?' 'Yes.' 'To commit acts of sabotage which may cause the death of hun- dreds of innocent people?' 'Yes.' 'To betray your country to foreign powers?' 'Yes.' 'You are prepared to cheat, to forge, to blackmail, to corrupt the minds of children, to distribute habit-forming drugs, to encourage prostitution, to disseminate venereal diseases- to do anything which is likely to cause demoralization and weaken the power of the Party?' 'Yes.' 'If, for example, it would somehow serve our interests to throw sulphuric acid in a child's face- are you prepared to do that?' 'Yes.' 'You are prepared to lose your identity and live out the rest of your life as a waiter or a dock-worker?' 'Yes.' 'You are prepared to commit suicide, if and when we order you to do so?' 'Yes.' 'You are prepared, the two of you, to separate and never see one another again?' 'No!' broke in Julia.

It appeared to Winston that a long time passed before he answered.

For a moment he seemed even to have been deprived of the power of speech.

His tongue worked soundlessly, forming the opening syllables first of one word, then of the other, over and over again.

Until he had said it, he did not know which word he was going to say.

'No,' he said finally.

'You did well to tell me,' said O'Brien.

'It is necessary for us to know everything.' He turned himself toward Julia and added in a voice with somewhat more expression in it: 'Do you understand that even if he survives, it may be as a dif- ferent person?

We may be obliged to give him a new identity.

His face, his movements, the shape of his hands, the colour of his hair- even his voice would be different.

And you yourself might have become a different person.

Our surgeons can alter people beyond recognition.

Sometimes it is necessary.

Sometimes we even amputate a limb.' Winston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at Martin's Mongolian face.

There were no scars that he could see.

Julia had turned a shade paler, so that her freckles were showing, but she faced O'Brien boldly.

She murmured something that seemed to be assent.

'Good.

Then that is settled.' There was a silver box of cigarettes on the table.

With a rather absent-minded air O'Brien pushed them towards the others, took one himself, then stood up and began to pace slowly to and fro, as though he could think better standing.

They were very good ciga- rettes, very thick and well-packed, with an unfamiliar silkiness in the paper.

O'Brien looked at his wrist-watch again.

'You had better go back to your Pantry, Martin,' he said.

'I shall switch on in a quarter of an hour.

Take a good look at these comrades' faces before you go.

You will be seeing them again.

I may not.' Exactly as they had done at the front door, the little man's dark eyes flickered over their faces.

There was not a trace of friendli- ness in his manner.

He was memorizing their appearance, but he felt no interest in them, or appeared to feel none.

It occurred to Winston that a synthetic face was perhaps incapable of changing its expression.

Without speaking or giving any kind of salutation, Martin went out, closing the door silently behind him.

O'Brien was strolling up and down, one hand in the pocket of his black overalls, the other holding his cigarette.

'You understand,' he said, 'that you will be fighting in the dark.

You will always be in the dark.

You will receive orders and you will obey them, without knowing why.

Later I shall send you a book from which you will learn the true nature of the society we live in, and the strategy by which we shall destroy it.

When you have read the book, you will be full members of the Brotherhood.

But between the general aims that we are fighting for and the immediate tasks of the moment, you will never know anything.

I tell you that the Brotherhood exists, but I cannot tell you whether it numbers a hundred members, or ten million.

From your per- sonal knowledge you will never be able to say that it numbers even as many as a dozen.

You will have three or four contacts, who will be renewed from time to time as they disappear.

As this was your first contact, it will be preserved.

When you receive orders, they will come from me.

If we find it necessary to com- municate with you, it will be through Martin.

When you are finally caught, you will confess.

That is unavoidable.

But you will have very little to confess, other than your own actions.

You will not be able to betray more than a handful of unimportant people.

Probably you will not even betray me.

By that time I may be dead, or I shall have become a different person, with a different face.' He continued to move to and fro over the soft carpet.

In spite of the bulkiness of his body there was a remarkable grace in his movements.

It came out even in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocket, or manipulated a cigarette.

More even than of strength, he gave an impression of confidence and of an understanding tinged by irony.

However much in earnest he might be, he had nothing of the single-mindedness that belongs to a fanatic.

When he spoke of murder, suicide, venereal disease, amputated limbs, and altered faces, it was with a faint air of per- siflage.

'This is unavoidable,' his voice seemed to say; 'this is what we have got to do, unflinchingly.

But this is not what we shall be doing when life is worth living again.' A wave of admiration, almost of worship, flowed out from Winston towards O'Brien.

For the moment he had forgotten the shadowy figure of Goldstein.

When you looked at O'Brien's powerful shoulders and his blunt-featured face, so ugly and yet so civilized, it was impos- sible to believe that he could be defeated.

There was no stratagem that he was not equal to, no danger that he could not foresee.

Even Julia seemed to be impressed.

She had let her cigarette go out and was listening intently.

O'Brien went on: 'You will have heard rumours of the existence of the Brotherhood.

No doubt you have formed your own picture of it.

You have imagined, probably, a huge underworld of conspirators, meeting secretly in cellars, scribbling messages on walls, recogniz- ing one another by codewords or by special movements of the hand.

Nothing of the kind exists.

The members of the Brotherhood have no way of recognizing one another, and it is impossible for any one member to be aware of the identity of more than a few others.

Goldstein himself, if he fell into the hands of the Thought Police, could not give them a complete list of members, or any information that would lead them to a complete list.

No such list exists.

The Brotherhood cannot be wiped out because it is not an organization in the ordinary sense.

Nothing holds it together except an idea which is indestructible.

You will never have anything to sustain you, except the idea.

You will get no comradeship and no encouragement.

When finally you are caught, you will get no help.

We never help our members.

At most, when it is absolutely necessary that someone should be silenced, we are occasionally able to smuggle a razor blade into a prisoner's cell.

You will have to get used to living without results and without hope.

You will work for a while, you will be caught, you will confess, and then you will die.

Those are the only results that you will ever see.

There is no possibility that any perceptible change will happen within our own lifetime.

We are the dead.

Our of dust and splinters of bone.

But how far away that future may be, there is no knowing.

It might be a thousand years.

At present nothing is possible except to extend the area of sanity little by little.

We cannot act collectively.

We can only spread our knowl- edge outwards from individual to individual, generation after generation.

In the face of the Thought Police there is no other way.' He halted and looked for the third time at his wrist-watch.

'It is almost time for you to leave, comrade,' he said to Julia.

'Wait.

The decanter is still half full.' He filled the glasses and raised his own glass by the stem.

'What shall it be this time?' he said, still with the same faint suggestion of irony.

'To the confusion of the Thought Police?

To the death of Big Brother?

To humanity?

To the future?' 'To the past,' said Winston.

'The past is more important,' agreed O'Brien gravely.

They emptied their glasses, and a moment later Julia stood up to go.

O'Brien took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed her a flat white tablet which he told her to place on her tongue.

It was important, he said, not to go out smelling of wine: the lift attendants were very observant.

As soon as the door had shut behind her he appeared to forget her existence.

He took another pace or two up and down, then stopped.

'There are details to be settled,' he said.

'I assume that you have a hiding-place of some kind?' Winston explained about the room over Mr Charrington's shop.

'That will do for the moment.

Later we will arrange something else for you.

It is important to change one's hiding-place fre- quently.

Meanwhile I shall send you a copy of THE BOOK'- even O'Brien, Winston noticed, seemed to pronounce the words as though they were in italics- 'Goldstein's book, you under- stand, as soon as possible.

It may be some days before I can get hold of one.

There are not many in existence, as you can imagine.

The Thought Police hunt them down and destroy them almost as fast as we can produce them.

It makes very little difference.

The book is indestructible.

If the last copy were gone, we could repro- duce it almost word for word.

Do you carry a brief-case to work with you?' he added.

'As a rule, yes.' 'What is it like?' 'Black, very shabby.

With two straps.' 'Black, two straps, very shabby- good.

One day in the fairly near future- I cannot give a date - one of the messages among your morning's work will contain a misprinted word, and you will have to ask for a repeat.

On the following day you will go to work without your brief-case.

At some time during the day, in the street, a man will touch you on the arm and say "I think you have dropped your brief-case."

The one he gives you will contain a copy of Goldstein's book.

You will return it within fourteen days.' They were silent for a moment.

'There are a couple of minutes before you need go,' said O'Brien.

'We shall meet again- if we do meet again--' Winston looked up at him.

'In the place where there is no dark- ness?' he said hesitantly.

O'Brien nodded without appearance of surprise.

'In the place where there is no darkness,' he said, as though he had recognized the allusion.

'And in the meantime, is there anything that you wish to say before you leave?

Any message?

Any question?.' Winston thought.

There did not seem to be any further ques- tion that he wanted to ask: still less did he feel any impulse to utter high-sounding generalities.

Instead of anything directly con- nected with O'Brien or the Brotherhood, there came into his mind a sort of composite picture of the dark bedroom where his mother had spent her last days, and the little room over Mr Charrington's shop, and the glass paperweight, and the steel engraving in its rosewood frame.

Almost at random he said: 'Did you ever happen to hear an old rhyme that begins "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's"?' Again O'Brien nodded.

With a sort of grave courtesy he com- pleted the stanza: 'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's, When will you pay me?

say the bells of Old Bailey, When I grow rich, say the bells of Shoreditch.' 'You knew the last line!' said Winston.

'Yes, I knew the last line.

And now, I am afraid, it is time for you to go.

But wait.

You had better let me give you one of these tablets.' As Winston stood up O'Brien held out a hand.

His powerful grip crushed the bones of Winston's palm.

At the door Winston looked back, but O'Brien seemed already to be in process of put- ting him out of mind.

He was waiting with his hand on the switch that controlled the telescreen.

Beyond him Winston could see the writing-table with its green-shaded lamp and the speakwrite and the wire baskets deep-laden with papers.

The incident was closed.

Within thirty seconds, it occurred to him, O'Brien would be back at his interrupted and important work on behalf of the Party.

Winston was gelatinous with fatigue.

Gelatinous was the right word.

It had come into his head spontaneously.

His body seemed to have not only the weakness of a jelly, but its translucency.

He felt that if he held up his hand he would be able to see the light through it.

All the blood and lymph had been drained out of him by an enormous debauch of work, leaving only a frail structure of nerves, bones, and skin.

All sensations seemed to be magnified.

His overalls fretted his shoulders, the pavement tickled his feet, even the opening and closing of a hand was an effort that made his joints creak.

He had worked more than ninety hours in five days.

So had everyone else in the Ministry.

Now it was all over, and he had lit- erally nothing to do, no Party work of any description, until tomorrow morning.

He could spend six hours in the hiding-place and another nine in his own bed.

Slowly, in mild afternoon sun- shine, he walked up a dingy street in the direction of Mr Charrington's shop, keeping one eye open for the patrols, but irra- tionally convinced that this afternoon there was no danger of anyone interfering with him.

The heavy brief-case that he was car- rying bumped against his knee at each step, sending a tingling sensation up and down the skin of his leg.

Inside it was the book, which he had now had in his possession for six days and had not yet opened, nor even looked at.

On the sixth day of Hate Week, after the processions, the speeches, the shouting, the singing, the banners, the posters, the films, the waxworks, the rolling of drums and squealing of trum- pets, the tramp of marching feet, the grinding of the caterpillars of tanks, the roar of massed planes, the booming of guns- after six days of this, when the great orgasm was quivering to its climax and the general hatred of Eurasia had boiled up into such delirium that if the crowd could have got their hands on the 2,000 Eurasian war-criminals who were to be publicly hanged on the last day of the proceedings, they would unquestionably have torn them to pieces- at just this moment it had been announced that Oceania was not after all at war with Eurasia.

Oceania was at war with Eastasia.

Eurasia was an ally.

There was, of course, no admission that any change had taken place.

Merely it became known, with extreme suddenness and everywhere at once, that Eastasia and not Eurasia was the enemy.

London squares at the moment when it happened.

It was night, and the white faces and the scarlet banners were luridly floodlit.

The square was packed with several thousand people, including a block of about a thousand schoolchildren in the uniform of the Spies.

On a scarlet-draped platform an orator of the Inner Party, a small lean man with disproportionately long arms and a large bald skull over which a few lank locks straggled, was haranguing the crowd.

A little Rumpelstiltskin figure, contorted with hatred, he gripped the neck of the microphone with one hand while the other, enormous at the end of a bony arm, clawed the air menac- ingly above his head.

His voice, made metallic by the amplifiers, boomed forth an endless catalogue of atrocities, massacres, depor- tations, lootings, rapings, torture of prisoners, bombing of civilians, lying propaganda, unjust aggressions, broken treaties.

It was almost impossible to listen to him without being first con- vinced and then maddened.

At every few moments the fury of the crowd boiled over and the voice of the speaker was drowned by a wild beast-like roaring that rose uncontrollably from thousands of throats.

The most savage yells of all came from the school- children.

The speech had been proceeding for perhaps twenty minutes when a messenger hurried on to the platform and a scrap of paper was slipped into the speaker's hand.

He unrolled and read it without pausing in his speech.

Nothing altered in his voice or manner, or in the content of what he was saying, but suddenly the names were different.

Without words said, a wave of under- standing rippled through the crowd.

Oceania was at war with Eastasia!

The next moment there was a tremendous commotion.

The banners and posters with which the square was decorated were all wrong!

Quite half of them had the wrong faces on them.

It was sabotage!

The agents of Goldstein had been at work!

There was a riotous interlude while posters were ripped from the walls, banners torn to shreds and trampled underfoot.

The Spies per- formed prodigies of activity in clambering over the rooftops and cutting the streamers that fluttered from the chimneys.

But within two or three minutes it was all over.

The orator, still gripping the neck of the microphone, his shoulders hunched forward, his free hand clawing at the air, had gone straight on with his speech.

One minute more, and the feral roars of rage were again bursting from the crowd.

The Hate continued exactly as before, except that the target had been changed.

The thing that impressed Winston in looking back was that the speaker had switched from one line to the other actually in mid- sentence, not only without a pause, but without even breaking the syntax.

But at the moment he had other things to preoccupy him.

It was during the moment of disorder while the posters were being torn down that a man whose face he did not see had tapped him on the shoulder and said, 'Excuse me, I think you've dropped your brief-case.' He took the brief-case abstractedly, without speaking.

He knew that it would be days before he had an opportunity to look inside it.

The instant that the demonstration was over he went straight to the Ministry of Truth, though the time was now nearly twenty-three hours.

The entire staff of the Ministry had done likewise.

The orders already issuing from the telescreen, recalling them to their posts, were hardly necessary.

Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war with Eastasia.

A large part of the political literature of five years was now completely obsolete.

Reports and records of all kinds, newspapers, books, pamphlets, films, sound-tracks, photo- graphs- all had to be rectified at lightning speed.

Although no directive was ever issued, it was known that the chiefs of the Department intended that within one week no reference to the war with Eurasia, or the alliance with Eastasia, should remain in existence anywhere.

The work was overwhelming, all the more so because the processes that it involved could not be called by their true names.

Everyone in the Records Department worked eighteen hours in the twenty-four, with two three-hour snatches of sleep.

Mattresses were brought up from the cellars and pitched all over the corridors: meals consisted of sandwiches and Victory Coffee wheeled round on trolleys by attendants from the canteen.

Each time that Winston broke off for one of his spells of sleep he tried to leave his desk clear of work, and each time that he crawled back sticky-eyed and aching, it was to find that another shower of paper cylinders had covered the desk like a snowdrift, half-bury- ing the speakwrite and overflowing on to the floor, so that the first job was always to stack them into a neat enough pile to give him room to work.

What was worst of all was that the work was by no means purely mechanical.

Often it was enough merely to sub- stitute one name for another, but any detailed report of events demanded care and imagination.

Even the geographical knowl- edge that one needed in transferring the war from one part of the world to another was considerable.

By the third day his eyes ached unbearably and his spectacles needed wiping every few minutes.

It was like struggling with some crushing physical task, something which one had the right to refuse and which one was nevertheless neurotically anxious to accomplish.

In so far as he had time to remember it, he was not troubled by the fact that every word he murmured into the speak- write, every stroke of his ink-pencil, was a deliberate lie.

He was as anxious as anyone else in the Department that the forgery should be perfect.

On the morning of the sixth day the dribble of cylinders slowed down.

For as much as half an hour nothing came out of the tube; then one more cylinder, then nothing.

Everywhere at about the same time the work was easing off.

A deep and as it were secret sigh went through the Department.

A mighty deed, which could never be mentioned, had been achieved.

It was now impossible for any human being to prove by documentary evi- dence that the war with Eurasia had ever happened.

At twelve hundred it was unexpectedly announced that all workers in the Ministry were free till tomorrow morning.

Winston, still carrying the brief-case containing the book, which had remained between his feet while he worked and under his body while he slept, went home, shaved himself, and almost fell asleep in his bath, although the water was barely more than tepid.

With a sort of voluptuous creaking in his joints he climbed the stair above Mr Charrington's shop.

He was tired, but not sleepy any longer.

He opened the window, lit the dirty little oilstove and put on a pan of water for coffee.

Julia would arrive presently: meanwhile there was the book.

He sat down in the sluttish arm- chair and undid the straps of the brief-case.

A heavy black volume, amateurishly bound, with no name or title on the cover.

The print also looked slightly irregular.

The pages were worn at the edges, and fell apart, easily, as though the book had passed through many hands.

The inscription on the title-page ran: THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF OLIGARCHICAL COLLECTIVISM by Emmanuel Goldstein Winston began reading: Chapter I Ignorance is Strength Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age, there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle, and the Low.

They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the essential structure of society has never altered.

Even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium, however far it is pushed one way or the other.

The aims of these groups are entirely irreconcilable...

Winston stopped reading, chiefly in order to appreciate the fact that he was reading, in comfort and safety.

He was alone: no tele- screen, no ear at the keyhole, no nervous impulse to glance over his shoulder or cover the page with his hand.

The sweet summer air played against his cheek.

From somewhere far away there floated the faint shouts of children: in the room itself there was no sound except the insect voice of the clock.

He settled deeper into the arm-chair and put his feet up on the fender.

It was bliss, it was eternity.

Suddenly, as one sometimes does with a book of which one knows that one will ultimately read and re-read every word, he opened it at a different place and found himself at Chapter III.

He went on reading: Chapter III War is Peace The splitting up of the world into three great super-states was an event which could be and indeed was foreseen before the middle of the twentieth century.

With the absorption of Europe by Russia and of the British Empire by the United States, two of the three existing powers, Eurasia and Oceania, were already effectively in being.

The third, Eastasia, only emerged as a distinct unit after another decade of confused fighting.

The frontiers between the three super- states are in some places arbitrary, and in others they fluctuate according to the fortunes of war, but in general they follow geographical lines.

Eurasia comprises the whole of the northern part of the European and Asiatic land-mass, from Portugal to the Bering Strait.

Oceania comprises the Americas, the Atlantic islands including the British Isles, Australasia, and the southern portion of Africa.

Eastasia, smaller than the others and with a less definite western fron- tier, comprises China and the countries to the south of it, the Japanese islands and a large but fluctuating portion of Manchuria, Mongolia, and Tibet.

In one combination or another, these three super-states are permanently at war, and have been so for the past twenty-five years.

War, however, is no longer the desperate, annihilating struggle that it was in the early decades of the twentieth century.

It is a warfare of limited aims between combatants who are unable to destroy one another, have no material cause for fighting and are not divided by any gen- uine ideological difference.

This is not to say that either the conduct of war, or the prevailing attitude towards it, has become less bloodthirsty or more chivalrous.

On the con- trary, war hysteria is continuous and universal in all countries, and such acts as raping, looting, the slaughter of children, the reduction of whole populations to slavery, and reprisals against prisoners which extend even to boiling and burying alive, are looked upon as normal, and, when they are committed by one's own side and not by the enemy, mer- itorious.

But in a physical sense war involves very small numbers of people, mostly highly-trained specialists, and causes comparatively few casualties.

The fighting, when there is any, takes place on the vague frontiers whose where- abouts the average man can only guess at, or round the Floating Fortresses which guard strategic spots on the sea lanes.

In the centres of civilization war means no more than a continuous shortage of consumption goods, and the occa- sional crash of a rocket bomb which may cause a few scores of deaths.

War has in fact changed its character.

More exactly, the reasons for which war is waged have changed in their order of importance.

Motives which were already pres- ent to some small extent in the great wars of the early twentieth century have now become dominant and are con- sciously recognized and acted upon.

To understand the nature of the present war- for in spite of the regrouping which occurs every few years, it is always the same war- one must realize in the first place that it is impossible for it to be decisive.

None of the three super- states could be definitively conquered even by the other two in combination.

They are too evenly matched, and their nat- ural defences are too formidable.

Eurasia is protected by its vast land spaces, Oceania by the width of the Atlantic and the Pacific, Eastasia by the fecundity and industriousness of its inhabitants.

Secondly, there is no longer, in a material sense, anything to fight about.

With the establishment of self-contained economies, in which production and con- sumption are geared to one another, the scramble for markets which was a main cause of previous wars has come to an end, while the competition for raw materials is no longer a matter of life and death.

In any case each of the three super-states is so vast that it can obtain almost all the materials that it needs within its own boundaries.

In so far as the war has a direct economic purpose, it is a war for labour power.

Between the frontiers of the super-states, and not per- manently in the possession of any of them, there lies a rough quadrilateral with its corners at Tangier, Brazzaville, Darwin, and Hong Kong, containing within it about a fifth of the population of the earth.

It is for the possession of these thickly-populated regions, and of the northern ice-cap, that the three powers are constantly struggling.

In practice no one power ever controls the whole of the disputed area.

Portions of it are constantly changing hands, and it is the chance of seizing this or that fragment by a sudden stroke of treachery that dictates the endless changes of alignment.

All of the disputed territories contain valuable minerals, and some of them yield important vegetable products such as rubber which in colder climates it is necessary to synthe- size by comparatively expensive methods.

But above all they contain a bottomless reserve of cheap labour.

Whichever power controls equatorial Africa, or the countries of the Middle East, or Southern India, or the Indonesian Archipelago, disposes also of the bodies of scores or hun- dreds of millions of ill-paid and hard-working coolies.

The inhabitants of these areas, reduced more or less openly to the status of slaves, pass continually from conqueror to con- queror, and are expended like so much coal or oil in the race to turn out more armaments, to capture more territory, to control more labour power, to turn out more armaments, to capture more territory, and so on indefinitely.

It should be noted that the fighting never really moves beyond the edges of the disputed areas.

The frontiers of Eurasia flow back and forth between the basin of the Congo and the northern shore of the Mediterranean; the islands of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific are constantly being captured and recaptured by Oceania or by Eastasia; in Mongolia the dividing line between Eurasia and Eastasia is never stable; round the Pole all three powers lay claim to enormous territories which in fact are largely uninhabited and unexplored: but the balance of power always remains roughly even, and the territory which forms the heartland of each super-state always remains inviolate.

Moreover, the labour of the exploited peo- ples round the Equator is not really necessary to the world's economy.

They add nothing to the wealth of the world, since whatever they produce is used for purposes of war, and the object of waging a war is always to be in a better position in which to wage another war.

By their labour the slave popu- lations allow the tempo of continuous warfare to be speeded up.

But if they did not exist, the structure of world society, and the process by which it maintains itself, would not be essentially different.

The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles of DOUBLETHINK, this aim is simultane- ously recognized and not recognized by the directing brains of the Inner Party) is to use up the products of the machine without raising the general standard of living.

Ever since the end of the nineteenth century, the problem of what to do with the surplus of consumption goods has been latent in industrial society.

At present, when few human beings even have enough to eat, this problem is obviously not urgent, and it might not have become so, even if no artificial processes of destruction had been at work.

The world of today is a bare, hungry, dilapidated place compared with the world that existed before 1914, and still more so if com- pared with the imaginary future to which the people of that period looked forward.

In the early twentieth century, the vision of a future society unbelievably rich, leisured, orderly, and efficient- a glittering antiseptic world of glass and steel and snow-white concrete- was part of the consciousness of nearly every literate person.

Science and technology were developing at a prodigious speed, and it seemed natural to assume that they would go on developing.

This failed to happen, partly because of the impoverishment caused by a long series of wars and revolutions, partly because scientific and technical progress depended on the empirical habit of thought, which could not survive in a strictly regimented society.

As a whole the world is more primitive today than it was fifty years ago.

Certain backward areas have advanced, and various devices, always in some way connected with warfare and police espionage, have been developed, but experiment and invention have largely stopped, and the rav- ages of the atomic war of the nineteen-fifties have never been fully repaired.

Nevertheless the dangers inherent in the machine are still there.

From the moment when the machine first made its appearance it was clear to all thinking people that the need for human drudgery, and therefore to a great extent for human inequality, had disappeared.

If the machine were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirt, illiteracy, and disease could be eliminated within a few gen- erations.

And in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by a sort of automatic process- by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossible not to distribute- the machine did raise the living standards of the average human being very greatly over a period of about fifty years at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries.

But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened the destruction- indeed, in some sense was the destruction- of a hierarchical society.

In a world in which everyone worked short hours, had enough to eat, lived in a house with a bathroom and a refrigerator, and possessed a motor-car or even an aeroplane, the most obvious and per- haps the most important form of inequality would already have disappeared.

If it once became general, wealth would confer no distinction.

It was possible, no doubt, to imagine a society in which WEALTH, in the sense of personal pos- sessions and luxuries, should be evenly distributed, while POWER remained in the hands of a small privileged caste.

But in practice such a society could not long remain stable.

For if leisure and security were enjoyed by all alike, the great mass of human beings who are normally stupefied by poverty would become literate and would learn to think for themselves; and when once they had done this, they would sooner or later realize that the privileged minority had no function, and they would sweep it away.

In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a basis of poverty and ignorance.

To return to the agricultural past, as some thinkers about the beginning of the twentieth century dreamed of doing, was not a practicable solution.

It con- flicted with the tendency towards mechanization which had become quasi-instinctive throughout almost the whole world, and moreover, any country which remained industri- ally backward was helpless in a military sense and was bound to be dominated, directly or indirectly, by its more advanced rivals.

Nor was it a satisfactory solution to keep the masses in poverty by restricting the output of goods.

This happened to a great extent during the final phase of capitalism, roughly between 1920 and 1940.

The economy of many countries was allowed to stagnate, land went out of cultivation, capi- tal equipment was not added to, great blocks of the population were prevented from working and kept half alive by State charity.

But this, too, entailed military weakness, and since the privations it inflicted were obviously unneces- sary, it made opposition inevitable.

The problem was how to keep the wheels of industry turning without increasing the real wealth of the world.

Goods must be produced, but they must not be distributed.

And in practice the only way of achieving this was by continuous warfare.

The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human lives, but of the products of human labour.

War is a way of shattering to pieces, or pouring into the stratosphere, or sinking in the depths of the sea, materials which might otherwise be used to make the masses too comfortable, and hence, in the long run, too intelligent.

Even when weapons of war are not actually destroyed, their manufacture is still a convenient way of expending labour power without produc- ing anything that can be consumed.

A Floating Fortress, for example, has locked up in it the labour that would build sev- eral hundred cargo-ships.

Ultimately it is scrapped as obsolete, never having brought any material benefit to any- body, and with further enormous labours another Floating Fortress is built.

In principle the war effort is always so planned as to eat up any surplus that might exist after meet- ing the bare needs of the population.

In practice the needs of the population are always underestimated, with the result that there is a chronic shortage of half the necessities of life; but this is looked on as an advantage.

It is deliberate policy to keep even the favoured groups somewhere near the brink of hardship, because a general state of scarcity increases the importance of small privileges and thus magnifies the dis- tinction between one group and another.

By the standards of the early twentieth century, even a member of the Inner Party lives an austere, laborious kind of life.

Nevertheless, the few luxuries that he does enjoy his large, well-appointed flat, the better texture of his clothes, the better quality of his food and drink and tobacco, his two or three servants, his private motor-car or helicopter- set him in a different world from a member of the Outer Party, and the members of the Outer Party have a similar advantage in comparison with the sub- merged masses whom we call 'the proles'.

The social atmosphere is that of a besieged city, where the possession of a lump of horseflesh makes the difference between wealth and poverty.

And at the same time the consciousness of being at war, and therefore in danger, makes the handing-over of all power to a small caste seem the natural, unavoidable con- dition of survival.

War, it will be seen, accomplishes the necessary destruc- tion, but accomplishes it in a psychologically acceptable way.

In principle it would be quite simple to waste the sur- plus labour of the world by building temples and pyramids, by digging holes and filling them up again, or even by pro- ducing vast quantities of goods and then setting fire to them.

But this would provide only the economic and not the emo- tional basis for a hierarchical society.

What is concerned here is not the morale of masses, whose attitude is unimportant so long as they are kept steadily at work, but the morale of the Party itself.

Even the humblest Party member is expected to be competent, industrious, and even intelligent within narrow limits, but it is also necessary that he should be a credulous and ignorant fanatic whose prevailing moods are fear, hatred, adulation, and orgiastic triumph.

In other words it is necessary that he should have the mentality appropriate to a state of war.

It does not matter whether the war is actually happening, and, since no decisive victory is possible, it does not matter whether the war is going well or badly.

All that is needed is that a state of war should exist.

The splitting of the intelligence which the Party requires of its members, and which is more easily achieved in an atmos- phere of war, is now almost universal, but the higher up the ranks one goes, the more marked it becomes.

It is precisely in the Inner Party that war hysteria and hatred of the enemy are strongest.

In his capacity as an administrator, it is often necessary for a member of the Inner Party to know that this or that item of war news is untruthful, and he may often be aware that the entire war is spurious and is either not hap- pening or is being waged for purposes quite other than the declared ones: but such knowledge is easily neutralized by the technique of DOUBLETHINK.

Meanwhile no Inner Party member wavers for an instant in his mystical belief that the war is real, and that it is bound to end victoriously, with Oceania the undisputed master of the entire world.

All members of the Inner Party believe in this coming con- quest as an article of faith.

It is to be achieved either by gradually acquiring more and more territory and so building up an overwhelming preponderance of power, or by the dis- covery of some new and unanswerable weapon.

The search for new weapons continues unceasingly, and is one of the very few remaining activities in which the inventive or spec- ulative type of mind can find any outlet.

In Oceania at the present day, Science, in the old sense, has almost ceased to exist.

In Newspeak there is no word for 'Science'.

The empir- ical method of thought, on which all the scientific achievements of the past were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles of Ingsoc.

And even technolog- ical progress only happens when its products can in some way be used for the diminution of human liberty.

In all the useful arts the world is either standing still or going back- wards.

The fields are cultivated with horse-ploughs while books are written by machinery.

But in matters of vital importance- meaning, in effect, war and police espionage- the empirical approach is still encouraged, or at least tolerated.

The two aims of the Party are to conquer the whole surface of the earth and to extinguish once and for all the possibility of independent thought.

There are therefore two great problems which the Party is concerned to solve.

One is how to discover, against his will, what another human being is thinking, and the other is how to kill several hundred million people in a few seconds without giving warning beforehand.

In so far as scientific research still con- tinues, this is its subject matter.

The scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitor, studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressions, gestures, and tones of voice, and testing the truth-producing effects of drugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical tor- ture; or he is chemist, physicist, or biologist concerned only with such branches of his special subject as are relevant to the taking of life.

In the vast laboratories of the Ministry of Peace, and in the experimental stations hidden in the Brazilian forests, or in the Australian desert, or on lost islands of the Antarctic, the teams of experts are indefatiga- bly at work.

Some are concerned simply with planning the logistics of future wars; others devise larger and larger rocket bombs, more and more powerful explosives, and more and more impenetrable armour-plating; others search for new and deadlier gases, or for soluble poisons capable of being produced in such quantities as to destroy the vegeta- tion of whole continents, or for breeds of disease germs immunized against all possible antibodies; others strive to produce a vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a submarine under the water, or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing-ship; others explore even remoter pos- sibilities such as focusing the sun's rays through lenses suspended thousands of kilometres away in space, or pro- ducing artificial earthquakes and tidal waves by tapping the heat at the earth's centre.

But none of these projects ever comes anywhere near real- ization, and none of the three super-states ever gains a significant lead on the others.

What is more remarkable is that all three powers already possess, in the atomic bomb, a weapon far more powerful than any that their present researches are likely to discover.

Although the Party, accord- ing to its habit, claims the invention for itself, atomic bombs first appeared as early as the nineteen-forties, and were first used on a large scale about ten years later.

At that time some hundreds of bombs were dropped on industrial centres, chiefly in European Russia, Western Europe, and North America.

The effect was to convince the ruling groups of all countries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of organized society, and hence of their own power.

Thereafter, although no formal agreement was ever made or hinted at, no more bombs were dropped.

All three powers merely continue to produce atomic bombs and store them up against the decisive opportunity which they all believe will come sooner or later.

And meanwhile the art of war has remained almost stationary for thirty or forty years.

Helicopters are more used than they were formerly, bombing planes have been largely superseded by self-propelled pro- jectiles, and the fragile movable battleship has given way to the almost unsinkable Floating Fortress; but otherwise there has been little development.

The tank, the submarine, the torpedo, the machine gun, even the rifle and the hand grenade are still in use.

And in spite of the endless slaughters reported in the Press and on the telescreens, the desperate battles of earlier wars, in which hundreds of thousands or even millions of men were often killed in a few weeks, have never been repeated.

None of the three super-states ever attempts any manoeu- vre which involves the risk of serious defeat.

When any large operation is undertaken, it is usually a surprise attack against an ally.

The strategy that all three powers are fol- lowing, or pretend to themselves that they are following, is the same.

The plan is, by a combination of fighting, bar- gaining, and well-timed strokes of treachery, to acquire a ring of bases completely encircling one or other of the rival states, and then to sign a pact of friendship with that rival and remain on peaceful terms for so many years as to lull suspicion to sleep.

During this time rockets loaded with atomic bombs can be assembled at all the strategic spots; finally they will all be fired simultaneously, with effects so devastating as to make retaliation impossible.

It will then be time to sign a pact of friendship with the remaining world- power, in preparation for another attack.

This scheme, it is hardly necessary to say, is a mere daydream, impossible of realization.

Moreover, no fighting ever occurs except in the disputed areas round the Equator and the Pole: no invasion of enemy territory is ever undertaken.

This explains the fact that in some places the frontiers between the super-states are arbitrary.

Eurasia, for example, could easily conquer the British Isles, which are geographically part of Europe, or on the other hand it would be possible for Oceania to push its frontiers to the Rhine or even to the Vistula.

But this would violate the principle, followed on all sides though never for- mulated, of cultural integrity.

If Oceania were to conquer the areas that used once to be known as France and Germany, it would be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants, a task of great physical difficulty, or to assimilate a population of about a hundred million people, who, so far as technical development goes, are roughly on the Oceanic level.

The problem is the same for all three super-states.

It is absolutely necessary to their structure that there should be no contact with foreigners, except, to a limited extent, with war prison- ers and coloured slaves.

Even the official ally of the moment is always regarded with the darkest suspicion.

War prisoners apart, the average citizen of Oceania never sets eyes on a cit- izen of either Eurasia or Eastasia, and he is forbidden the knowledge of foreign languages.

If he were allowed contact with foreigners he would discover that they are creatures similar to himself and that most of what he has been told about them is lies.

The sealed world in which he lives would be broken, and the fear, hatred, and self-righteousness on which his morale depends might evaporate.

It is therefore realized on all sides that however often Persia, or Egypt, or Java, or Ceylon may change hands, the main frontiers must never be crossed by anything except bombs.

Under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud, but tacitly understood and acted upon: namely, that the conditions of life in all three super-states are very much the same.

In Oceania the prevailing philosophy is called Ingsoc, in Eurasia it is called Neo-Bolshevism, and in Eastasia it is called by a Chinese name usually translated as Death- Worship, but perhaps better rendered as Obliteration of the Self.

The citizen of Oceania is not allowed to know anything of the tenets of the other two philosophies, but he is taught to execrate them as barbarous outrages upon morality and common sense.

Actually the three philosophies are barely distinguishable, and the social systems which they support are not distinguishable at all.

Everywhere there is the same pyramidal structure, the same worship of semi-divine leader, the same economy existing by and for continuous warfare.

It follows that the three super-states not only cannot conquer one another, but would gain no advantage by doing so.

On the contrary, so long as they remain in conflict they prop one another up, like three sheaves of corn.

And, as usual, the ruling groups of all three powers are simultaneously aware and unaware of what they are doing.

Their lives are dedi- cated to world conquest, but they also know that it is necessary that the war should continue everlastingly and without victory.

Meanwhile the fact that there IS no danger of conquest makes possible the denial of reality which is the special feature of Ingsoc and its rival systems of thought.

Here it is necessary to repeat what has been said earlier, that by becoming continuous war has fundamentally changed its character.

In past ages, a war, almost by definition, was something that sooner or later came to an end, usually in unmistakable victory or defeat.

In the past, also, war was one of the main instruments by which human societies were kept in touch with physical reality.

All rulers in all ages have tried to impose a false view of the world upon their followers, but they could not afford to encourage any illusion that tended to impair military efficiency.

So long as defeat meant the loss of independence, or some other result generally held to be undesirable, the precautions against defeat had to be serious.

Physical facts could not be ignored.

In philosophy, or reli- gion, or ethics, or politics, two and two might make five, but when one was designing a gun or an aeroplane they had to make four.

Inefficient nations were always conquered sooner or later, and the struggle for efficiency was inimical to illu- sions.

Moreover, to be efficient it was necessary to be able to learn from the past, which meant having a fairly accurate idea of what had happened in the past.

Newspapers and his- tory books were, of course, always coloured and biased, but falsification of the kind that is practised today would have been impossible.

War was a sure safeguard of sanity, and so far as the ruling classes were concerned it was probably the most important of all safeguards.

While wars could be won or lost, no ruling class could be completely irresponsible.

But when war becomes literally continuous, it also ceases to be dangerous.

When war is continuous there is no such thing as military necessity.

Technical progress can cease and the most palpable facts can be denied or disregarded.

As we have seen, researches that could be called scientific are still carried out for the purposes of war, but they are essentially a kind of daydreaming, and their failure to show results is not important.

Efficiency, even military efficiency, is no longer needed.

Nothing is efficient in Oceania except the Thought Police.

Since each of the three super-states is uncon- querable, each is in effect a separate universe within which almost any perversion of thought can be safely practised.

Reality only exerts its pressure through the needs of every- day life- the need to eat and drink, to get shelter and clothing, to avoid swallowing poison or stepping out of top- storey windows, and the like.

Between life and death, and between physical pleasure and physical pain, there is still a distinction, but that is all.

Cut off from contact with the outer world, and with the past, the citizen of Oceania is like a man in interstellar space, who has no way of knowing which direction is up and which is down.

The rulers of such a state are absolute, as the Pharaohs or the Caesars could not be.

They are obliged to prevent their followers from starving to death in numbers large enough to be inconven- ient, and they are obliged to remain at the same low level of military technique as their rivals; but once that minimum is achieved, they can twist reality into whatever shape they choose.

The war, therefore, if we judge it by the standards of pre- vious wars, is merely an imposture.

It is like the battles between certain ruminant animals whose horns are set at such an angle that they are incapable of hurting one another.

But though it is unreal it is not meaningless.

It eats up the surplus of consumable goods, and it helps to preserve the special mental atmosphere that a hierarchical society needs.

War, it will be seen, is now a purely internal affair.

In the past, the ruling groups of all countries, although they might recognize their common interest and therefore limit the destructiveness of war, did fight against one another, and the victor always plundered the vanquished.

In our own day they are not fighting against one another at all.

The war is waged by each ruling group against its own subjects, and the object of the war is not to make or prevent conquests of ter- ritory, but to keep the structure of society intact.

The very word 'war', therefore, has become misleading.

It would probably be accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has ceased to exist.

The peculiar pressure that it exerted on human beings between the Neolithic Age and the early twentieth century has disappeared and been replaced by something quite different.

The effect would be much the same if the three super-states, instead of fighting one another, should agree to live in perpetual peace, each inviolate within its own boundaries.

For in that case each would still be a self-contained universe, freed for ever from the sobering influence of external danger.

A peace that was truly perma- nent would be the same as a permanent war.

This- although the vast majority of Party members understand it only in a shallower sense- is the inner meaning of the Party slogan: WAR IS PEACE.

Winston stopped reading for a moment.

Somewhere in remote distance a rocket bomb thundered.

The blissful feeling of being alone with the forbidden book, in a room with no telescreen, had not worn off.

Solitude and safety were physical sensations, mixed up somehow with the tiredness of his body, the softness of the chair, the touch of the faint breeze from the window that played upon his cheek.

The book fascinated him, or more exactly it reas- sured him.

In a sense it told him nothing that was new, but that was part of the attraction.

It said what he would have said, if it had been possible for him to set his scattered thoughts in order.

It was the product of a mind similar to his own, but enormously more powerful, more systematic, less fear-ridden.

The best books, he perceived, are those that tell you what you know already.

He had just turned back to Chapter I when he heard Julia's footstep on the stair and started out of his chair to meet her.

She dumped her brown tool-bag on the floor and flung herself into his arms.

It was more than a week since they had seen one another.

'I've got THE BOOK,' he said as they disentangled themselves.

'Oh, you've got it?

Good,' she said without much interest, and almost immediately knelt down beside the oil stove to make the coffee.

They did not return to the subject until they had been in bed for half an hour.

The evening was just cool enough to make it worth while to pull up the counterpane.

From below came the familiar sound of singing and the scrape of boots on the flagstones.

The brawny red-armed woman whom Winston had seen there on his first visit was almost a fixture in the yard.

There seemed to be no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fro between the washtub and the line, alternately gagging herself with clothes pegs and breaking forth into lusty song.

Julia had settled down on her side and seemed to be already on the point of falling asleep.

He reached out for the book, which was lying on the floor, and sat up against the bedhead.

'We must read it,' he said.

'You too.

All members of the Brotherhood have to read it.' 'You read it,' she said with her eyes shut.

'Read it aloud.

That's the best way.

Then you can explain it to me as you go.' The clock's hands said six, meaning eighteen.

They had three or four hours ahead of them.

He propped the book against his knees and began reading: Chapter I Ignorance is Strength Throughout recorded time, and probably since the end of the Neolithic Age, there have been three kinds of people in the world, the High, the Middle, and the Low.

They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the essential structure of society has never altered.

Even after enormous upheavals and seemingly irrevocable changes, the same pattern has always reasserted itself, just as a gyroscope will always return to equilibrium, however far it is pushed one way or the other 'Julia, are you awake?' said Winston.

'Yes, my love, I'm listening.

Go on.

It's marvellous.' He continued reading: The aims of these three groups are entirely irreconcilable.

The aim of the High is to remain where they are.

The aim of the Middle is to change places with the High.

The aim of the Low, when they have an aim- for it is an abiding charac- teristic of the Low that they are too much crushed by drudgery to be more than intermittently conscious of any- thing outside their daily lives- is to abolish all distinctions and create a society in which all men shall be equal.

Thus throughout history a struggle which is the same in its main outlines recurs over and over again.

For long periods the High seem to be securely in power, but sooner or later there always comes a moment when they lose either their belief in themselves or their capacity to govern efficiently, or both.

They are then overthrown by the Middle, who enlist the Low on their side by pretending to them that they are fight- ing for liberty and justice.

As soon as they have reached their objective, the Middle thrust the Low back into their old position of servitude, and themselves become the High.

Presently a new Middle group splits off from one of the other groups, or from both of them, and the struggle begins over again.

Of the three groups, only the Low are never even temporarily successful in achieving their aims.

It would be an exaggeration to say that throughout history there has been no progress of a material kind.

Even today, in a period of decline, the average human being is physically better off than he was a few centuries ago.

But no advance in wealth, no softening of manners, no reform or revolution has ever brought human equality a millimetre nearer.

From the point of view of the Low, no historic change has ever meant much more than a change in the name of their masters.

By the late nineteenth century the recurrence of this pat- tern had become obvious to many observers.

There then rose schools of thinkers who interpreted history as a cyclical process and claimed to show that inequality was the unal- terable law of human life.

This doctrine, of course, had always had its adherents, but in the manner in which it was now put forward there was a significant change.

In the past the need for a hierarchical form of society had been the doc- trine specifically of the High.

It had been preached by kings and aristocrats and by the priests, lawyers, and the like who were parasitical upon them, and it had generally been soft- ened by promises of compensation in an imaginary world beyond the grave.

The Middle, so long as it was struggling for power, had always made use of such terms as freedom, justice, and fraternity.

Now, however, the concept of human brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were not yet in positions of command, but merely hoped to be so before long.

In the past the Middle had made revolutions under the banner of equality, and then had established a fresh tyranny as soon as the old one was overthrown.

The new Middle groups in effect proclaimed their tyranny beforehand.

Socialism, a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was the last link in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellions of antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of past ages.

But in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the aim of establishing liberty and equality was more and more openly abandoned.

The new movements which appeared in the middle years of the century, Ingsoc in Oceania, Neo-Bolshevism in Eurasia, Death-Worship, as it is commonly called, in Eastasia, had the conscious aim of per- petuating UNfreedom and INequality.

These new movements, of course, grew out of the old ones and tended to keep their names and pay lip-service to their ideology.

But the purpose of all of them was to arrest progress and freeze history at a chosen moment.

The familiar pendulum swing was to happen once more, and then stop.

As usual, the High were to be turned out by the Middle, who would then become the High; but this time, by conscious strategy, the High would be able to maintain their position permanently.

The new doctrines arose partly because of the accumula- tion of historical knowledge, and the growth of the historical sense, which had hardly existed before the nineteenth cen- tury.

The cyclical movement of history was now intelligible, or appeared to be so; and if it was intelligible, then it was alterable.

But the principal, underlying cause was that, as early as the beginning of the twentieth century, human equality had become technically possible.

It was still true that men were not equal in their native talents and that func- tions had to be specialized in ways that favoured some individuals against others; but there was no longer any real need for class distinctions or for large differences of wealth.

In earlier ages, class distinctions had been not only inevitable but desirable.

Inequality was the price of civilization.

With the development of machine production, however, the case was altered.

Even if it was still necessary for human beings to do different kinds of work, it was no longer necessary for them to live at different social or economic levels.

Therefore, from the point of view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing power, human equality was no longer an ideal to be striven after, but a danger to be averted.

In more primitive ages, when a just and peaceful society was in fact not possible, it had been fairly easy to believe it.

The idea of an earthly paradise in which men should live together in a state of brotherhood, without laws and without brute labour, had haunted the human imagination for thousands of years.

And this vision had had a certain hold even on the groups who actually profited by each historical change.

The heirs of the French, English, and American revolutions had partly believed in their own phrases about the rights of man, freedom of speech, equality before the law, and the like, and have even allowed their conduct to be influenced by them to some extent.

But by the fourth decade of the twentieth cen- tury all the main currents of political thought were authoritarian.

The earthly paradise had been discredited at exactly the moment when it became realizable.

Every new political theory, by whatever name it called itself, led back to hierarchy and regimentation.

And in the general hardening of outlook that set in round about 1930, practices which had been long abandoned, in some cases for hundreds of years- imprisonment without trial, the use of war prisoners as slaves, public executions, torture to extract confessions, the use of hostages, and the deportation of whole populations- not only became common again, but were tolerated and even defended by people who considered themselves enlightened and progressive.

It was only after a decade of national wars, civil wars, rev- olutions, and counter-revolutions in all parts of the world that Ingsoc and its rivals emerged as fully worked-out polit- ical theories.

But they had been foreshadowed by the various systems, generally called totalitarian, which had appeared earlier in the century, and the main outlines of the world which would emerge from the prevailing chaos had long been obvious.

What kind of people would control this world had been equally obvious.

The new aristocracy was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientists, technicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, sociologists, teach- ers, journalists, and professional politicians.

These people, whose origins lay in the salaried middle class and the upper grades of the working class, had been shaped and brought together by the barren world of monopoly industry and cen- tralized government.

As compared with their opposite numbers in past ages, they were less avaricious, less tempted by luxury, hungrier for pure power, and, above all, more conscious of what they were doing and more intent on crushing opposition.

This last difference was cardinal.

By comparison with that existing today, all the tyrannies of the past were half-hearted and inefficient.

The ruling groups were always infected to some extent by liberal ideas, and were content to leave loose ends everywhere, to regard only the overt act and to be uninterested in what their subjects were thinking.

Even the Catholic Church of the Middle Ages was tolerant by modern standards.

Part of the reason for this was that in the past no government had the power to keep its citizens under constant surveillance.

The invention of print, however, made it easier to manipulate public opinion, and the film and the radio carried the process further.

With the development of television, and the technical advance which made it possible to receive and transmit simultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end.

Every citi- zen, or at least every citizen important enough to be worth watching, could be kept for twenty-four hours a day under the eyes of the police and in the sound of official propa- ganda, with all other channels of communication closed.

The possibility of enforcing not only complete obedience to the will of the State, but complete uniformity of opinion on all subjects, now existed for the first time.

After the revolutionary period of the fifties and sixties, society regrouped itself, as always, into High, Middle, and Low.

But the new High group, unlike all its forerunners, did not act upon instinct but knew what was needed to safe- guard its position.

It had long been realized that the only secure basis for oligarchy is collectivism.

Wealth and privi- lege are most easily defended when they are possessed jointly.

The so-called 'abolition of private property' which took place in the middle years of the century meant, in effect, the concentration of property in far fewer hands than before: but with this difference, that the new owners were a group instead of a mass of individuals.

Individually, no member of the Party owns anything, except petty personal belongings.

Collectively, the Party owns everything in Oceania, because it controls everything, and disposes of the products as it thinks fit.

In the years following the Revolution it was able to step into this commanding position almost unopposed, because the whole process was represented as an act of col- lectivization.

It had always been assumed that if the capitalist class were expropriated, Socialism must follow: and unquestionably the capitalists had been expropriated.

Factories, mines, land, houses, transport- everything had been taken away from them: and since these things were no longer private property, it followed that they must be public property.

Ingsoc, which grew out of the earlier Socialist movement and inherited its phraseology, has in fact carried out the main item in the Socialist programme; with the result, foreseen and intended beforehand, that economic inequality has been made permanent.

But the problems of perpetuating a hierarchical society go deeper than this.

There are only four ways in which a ruling group can fall from power.

Either it is conquered from with- out, or it governs so inefficiently that the masses are stirred to revolt, or it allows a strong and discontented Middle group to come into being, or it loses its own self-confidence and willingness to govern.

These causes do not operate singly, and as a rule all four of them are present in some degree.

A ruling class which could guard against all of them would remain in power permanently.

Ultimately the deter- mining factor is the mental attitude of the ruling class itself.

After the middle of the present century, the first danger had in reality disappeared.

Each of the three powers which now divide the world is in fact unconquerable, and could only become conquerable through slow demographic changes which a government with wide powers can easily avert.

The second danger, also, is only a theoretical one.

The masses never revolt of their own accord, and they never revolt merely because they are oppressed.

Indeed, so long as they are not permitted to have standards of comparison, they never even become aware that they are oppressed.

The recurrent economic crises of past times were totally unnec- essary and are not now permitted to happen, but other and equally large dislocations can and do happen without having political results, because there is no way in which discontent can become articulate.

As for the problem of over-produc- tion, which has been latent in our society since the development of machine technique, it is solved by the device of continuous warfare (see Chapter III), which is also useful in keying up public morale to the necessary pitch.

From the point of view of our present rulers, therefore, the only gen- uine dangers are the splitting-off of a new group of able, under-employed, power-hungry people, and the growth of liberalism and scepticism in their own ranks.

The problem, that is to say, is educational.

It is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness both of the directing group and of the larger executive group that lies immediately below it.

The consciousness of the masses needs only to be influenced in a negative way.

Given this background, one could infer, if one did not know it already, the general structure of Oceanic society.

At the apex of the pyramid comes Big Brother.

Big Brother is infallible and all-powerful.

Every success, every achieve- ment, every victory, every scientific discovery, all knowledge, all wisdom, all happiness, all virtue, are held to issue directly from his leadership and inspiration.

Nobody has ever seen Big Brother.

He is a face on the hoardings, a voice on the telescreen.

We may be reasonably sure that he will never die, and there is already considerable uncertainty as to when he was born.

Big Brother is the guise in which the Party chooses to exhibit itself to the world.

His function is to act as a focusing point for love, fear, and reverence, emotions which are more easily felt towards an individual than towards an organization.

Below Big Brother comes the Inner Party.

Its numbers limited to six millions, or something less than 2 per cent of the population of Oceania.

Below the Inner Party comes the Outer Party, which, if the Inner Party is described as the brain of the State, may be justly likened to the hands.

Below that come the dumb masses whom we habitually refer to as 'the proles', numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the pop- ulation.

In the terms of our earlier classification, the proles are the Low: for the slave population of the equatorial lands who pass constantly from conqueror to conqueror, are not a permanent or necessary part of the structure.

In principle, membership of these three groups is not hereditary.

The child of Inner Party parents is in theory not born into the Inner Party.

Admission to either branch of the Party is by examination, taken at the age of sixteen.

Nor is there any racial discrimination, or any marked domination of one province by another.

Jews, Negroes, South Americans of pure Indian blood are to be found in the highest ranks of the Party, and the administrators of any area are always drawn from the inhabitants of that area.

In no part of Oceania do the inhabitants have the feeling that they are a colonial population ruled from a distant capital.

Oceania has no capital, and its titular head is a person whose where- abouts nobody knows.

Except that English is its chief LINGUA FRANCA and Newspeak its official language, it is not centralized in any way.

Its rulers are not held together by blood-ties but by adherence to a common doctrine.

It is true that our society is stratified, and very rigidly stratified, on what at first sight appear to be hereditary lines.

There is far less to-and-fro movement between the different groups than happened under capitalism or even in the pre-industrial age.

Between the two branches of the Party there is a certain amount of interchange, but only so much as will ensure that weaklings are excluded from the Inner Party and that ambi- tious members of the Outer Party are made harmless by allowing them to rise.

Proletarians, in practice, are not allowed to graduate into the Party.

The most gifted among them, who might possibly become nuclei of discontent, are simply marked down by the Thought Police and eliminated.

But this state of affairs is not necessarily permanent, nor is it a matter of principle.

The Party is not a class in the old sense of the word.

It does not aim at transmitting power to its own children, as such; and if there were no other way of keeping the ablest people at the top, it would be perfectly prepared to recruit an entire new generation from the ranks of the prole- tariat.

In the crucial years, the fact that the Party was not a hereditary body did a great deal to neutralize opposition.

The older kind of Socialist, who had been trained to fight against something called 'class privilege' assumed that what is not hereditary cannot be permanent.

He did not see that the continuity of an oligarchy need not be physical, nor did he pause to reflect that hereditary aristocracies have always been shortlived, whereas adoptive organizations such as the Catholic Church have sometimes lasted for hundreds or thousands of years.

The essence of oligarchical rule is not father-to-son inheritance, but the persistence of a certain world-view and a certain way of life, imposed by the dead upon the living.

A ruling group is a ruling group so long as it can nominate its successors.

The Party is not concerned with perpetuating its blood but with perpetuating itself.

WHO wields power is not important, provided that the hier- archical structure remains always the same.

All the beliefs, habits, tastes, emotions, mental attitudes that characterize our time are really designed to sustain the mystique of the Party and prevent the true nature of present- day society from being perceived.

Physical rebellion, or any preliminary move towards rebellion, is at present not possi- ble.

From the proletarians nothing is to be feared.

Left to themselves, they will continue from generation to generation and from century to century, working, breeding, and dying, not only without any impulse to rebel, but without the power of grasping that the world could be other than it is.

They could only become dangerous if the advance of indus- trial technique made it necessary to educate them more highly; but, since military and commercial rivalry are no longer important, the level of popular education is actually declining.

What opinions the masses hold, or do not hold, is looked on as a matter of indifference.

They can be granted intellectual liberty because they have no intellect.

In a Party member, on the other hand, not even the smallest deviation of opinion on the most unimportant subject can be tolerated.

A Party member lives from birth to death under the eye of the Thought Police.

Even when he is alone he can never be sure that he is alone.

Wherever he may be, asleep or awake, working or resting, in his bath or in bed, he can be inspected without warning and without knowing that he is being inspected.

Nothing that he does is indifferent.

His friend- ships, his relaxations, his behaviour towards his wife and children, the expression of his face when he is alone, the words he mutters in sleep, even the characteristic movements of his body, are all jealously scrutinized.

Not only any actual misdemeanour, but any eccentricity, however small, any change of habits, any nervous mannerism that could possibly be the symptom of an inner struggle, is certain to be detected.

He has no freedom of choice in any direction what- ever.

On the other hand his actions are not regulated by law or by any clearly formulated code of behaviour.

In Oceania there is no law.

Thoughts and actions which, when detected, mean certain death are not formally forbidden, and the end- less purges, arrests, tortures, imprisonments, and vaporizations are not inflicted as punishment for crimes which have actually been committed, but are merely the wiping-out of persons who might perhaps commit a crime at some time in the future.

A Party member is required to have not only the right opinions, but the right instincts.

Many of the beliefs and attitudes demanded of him are never plainly stated, and could not be stated without laying bare the con- tradictions inherent in Ingsoc.

If he is a person naturally orthodox (in Newspeak a GOODTHINKER), he will in all circumstances know, without taking thought, what is the true belief or the desirable emotion.

But in any case an elab- orate mental training, undergone in childhood and grouping itself round the Newspeak words CRIMESTOP, BLACK- WHITE, and DOUBLETHINK, makes him unwilling and unable to think too deeply on any subject whatever.

A Party member is expected to have no private emotions and no respites from enthusiasm.

He is supposed to live in a continuous frenzy of hatred of foreign enemies and internal traitors, triumph over victories, and self-abasement before the power and wisdom of the Party.

The discontents pro- duced by his bare, unsatisfying life are deliberately turned outwards and dissipated by such devices as the Two Minutes Hate, and the speculations which might possibly induce a sceptical or rebellious attitude are killed in advance by his early acquired inner discipline.

The first and simplest stage in the discipline, which can be taught even to young children, is called, in Newspeak, CRIMESTOP.

CRIMESTOP means the faculty of stopping short, as though by instinct, at the threshold of any dangerous thought.

It includes the power of not grasping analogies, of failing to perceive logical errors, of misunderstanding the simplest arguments if they are inimical to Ingsoc, and of being bored or repelled by any train of thought which is capable of leading in a heretical direction.

CRIMESTOP, in short, means protective stupid- ity.

But stupidity is not enough.

On the contrary, orthodoxy in the full sense demands a control over one's own mental processes as complete as that of a contortionist over his body.

Oceanic society rests ultimately on the belief that Big Brother is omnipotent and that the Party is infallible.

But since in reality Big Brother is not omnipotent and the party is not infallible, there is need for an unwearying, moment-to- moment flexibility in the treatment of facts.

The keyword here is BLACKWHITE.

Like so many Newspeak words, this word has two mutually contradictory meanings.

Applied to an opponent, it means the habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the plain facts.

Applied to a Party member, it means a loyal willingness to say that black is white when Party discipline demands this.

But it means also the ability to BELIEVE that black is white, and more, to KNOW that black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary.

This demands a continuous alteration of the past, made possible by the system of thought which really embraces all the rest, and which is known in Newspeak as DOUBLETHINK.

The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which is subsidiary and, so to speak, precautionary.

The subsidiary reason is that the Party member, like the pro- letarian, tolerates present-day conditions partly because he has no standards of comparison.

He must be cut off from the past, just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it is necessary for him to believe that he is better off than his ancestors and that the average level of material comfort is constantly rising.

But by far the more important reason for the readjustment of the past is the need to safe- guard the infallibility of the Party.

It is not merely that speeches, statistics, and records of every kind must be con- stantly brought up to date in order to show that the predictions of the Party were in all cases right.

It is also that no change in doctrine or in political alignment can ever be admitted.

For to change one's mind, or even one's policy, is a confession of weakness.

If, for example, Eurasia or Eastasia (whichever it may be) is the enemy today, then that country must always have been the enemy.

And if the facts say otherwise then the facts must be altered.

Thus history is continuously rewritten.

This day-to-day falsification of the past, carried out by the Ministry of Truth, is as necessary to the stability of the regime as the work of repression and espi- onage carried out by the Ministry of Love.

The mutability of the past is the central tenet of Ingsoc.

Past events, it is argued, have no objective existence, but sur- vive only in written records and in human memories.

The past is whatever the records and the memories agree upon.

And since the Party is in full control of all records and in equally full control of the minds of its members, it follows that the past is whatever the Party chooses to make it.

It also follows that though the past is alterable, it never has been altered in any specific instance.

For when it has been recre- ated in whatever shape is needed at the moment, then this new version IS the past, and no different past can ever have existed.

This holds good even when, as often happens, the same event has to be altered out of recognition several times in the course of a year.

At all times the Party is in possession of absolute truth, and clearly the absolute can never have been different from what it is now.

It will be seen that the control of the past depends above all on the training of memory.

To make sure that all written records agree with the orthodoxy of the moment is merely a mechanical act.

But it is also necessary to REMEMBER that events happened in the desired manner.

And if it is necessary to rearrange one's memories or to tamper with written records, then it is nec- essary to FORGET that one has done so.

The trick of doing this can be learned like any other mental technique.

It is learned by the majority of Party members, and certainly by all who are intelligent as well as orthodox.

In Oldspeak it is called, quite frankly, 'reality control'.

In Newspeak it is called DOUBLETHINK, though DOUBLETHINK com- prises much else as well.

DOUBLETHINK means the power of holding two con- tradictory beliefs in one's mind simultaneously, and accepting both of them.

The Party intellectual knows in which direction his memories must be altered; he therefore knows that he is playing tricks with reality; but by the exer- cise of DOUBLETHINK he also satisfies himself that reality is not violated.

The process has to be conscious, or it would not be carried out with sufficient precision, but it also has to be unconscious, or it would bring with it a feeling of falsity and hence of guilt.

DOUBLETHINK lies at the very heart of Ingsoc, since the essential act of the Party is to use conscious deception while retaining the firmness of purpose that goes with complete honesty.

To tell deliberate lies while genuinely believing in them, to forget any fact that has become incon- venient, and then, when it becomes necessary again, to draw it back from oblivion for just so long as it is needed, to deny the existence of objective reality and all the while to take account of the reality which one denies- all this is indis- pensably necessary.

Even in using the word DOUBLETHINK it is necessary to exercise DOUBLE- THINK.

For by using the word one admits that one is tampering with reality; by a fresh act of DOUBLETHINK one erases this knowledge; and so on indefinitely, with the lie always one leap ahead of the truth.

Ultimately it is by means of DOUBLETHINK that the Party has been able- and may, for all we know, continue to be able for thousands of years- to arrest the course of history.

All past oligarchies have fallen from power either because they ossified or because they grew soft.

Either they became stupid and arrogant, failed to adjust themselves to changing circumstances, and were overthrown; or they became liberal and cowardly, made concessions when they should have used force, and once again were overthrown.

They fell, that is to say, either through consciousness or through uncon- sciousness.

It is the achievement of the Party to have produced a system of thought in which both conditions can exist simultaneously.

And upon no other intellectual basis could the dominion of the Party be made permanent.

If one is to rule, and to continue ruling, one must be able to dislo- cate the sense of reality.

For the secret of rulership is to combine a belief in one's own infallibility with the Power to learn from past mistakes.

It need hardly be said that the subtlest practitioners of DOUBLETHINK are those who invented DOUBLETHINK and know that it is a vast system of mental cheating.

In our society, those who have the best knowledge of what is hap- pening are also those who are furthest from seeing the world as it is.

In general, the greater the understanding, the greater the delusion; the more intelligent, the less sane.

One clear illustration of this is the fact that war hysteria increases in intensity as one rises in the social scale.

Those whose atti- tude towards the war is most nearly rational are the subject peoples of the disputed territories.

To these people the war is simply a continuous calamity which sweeps to and fro over their bodies like a tidal wave.

Which side is winning is a matter of complete indifference to them.

They are aware that a change of overlordship means simply that they will be doing the same work as before for new masters who treat them in the same manner as the old ones.

The slightly more favoured workers whom we call 'the proles' are only inter- mittently conscious of the war.

When it is necessary they can be prodded into frenzies of fear and hatred, but when left to themselves they are capable of forgetting for long periods that the war is happening.

It is in the ranks of the Party, and above all of the Inner Party, that the true war enthusiasm is found.

World-conquest is believed in most firmly by those who know it to be impossible.

This peculiar linking-together of opposites- knowledge with ignorance, cynicism with fanaticism- is one of the chief distinguishing marks of Oceanic society.

The official ideology abounds with contra- dictions even when there is no practical reason for them.

Thus, the Party rejects and vilifies every principle for which the Socialist movement originally stood, and it chooses to do this in the name of Socialism.

It preaches a contempt for the working class unexampled for centuries past, and it dresses its members in a uniform which was at one time peculiar to manual workers and was adopted for that reason.

It system- atically undermines the solidarity of the family, and it calls its leader by a name which is a direct appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty.

Even the names of the four Ministries by which we are governed exhibit a sort of impudence in their deliberate reversal of the facts.

The Ministry of Peace con- cerns itself with war, the Ministry of Truth with lies, the Ministry of Love with torture and the Ministry of Plenty with starvation.

These contradictions are not accidental, nor do they result from ordinary hypocrisy; they are deliberate exercises in DOUBLETHINK.

For it is only by reconciling contradictions that power can be retained indefinitely.

In no other way could the ancient cycle be broken.

If human equality is to be for ever averted- if the High, as we have called them, are to keep their places permanently- then the prevailing mental condition must be controlled insanity.

But there is one question which until this moment we have almost ignored.

It is; WHY should human equality be averted?

Supposing that the mechanics of the process have been rightly described, what is the motive for this huge, accurately planned effort to freeze history at a particular moment of time?

Here we reach the central secret.

As we have seen.

the mystique of the Party, and above all of the Inner Party, depends upon DOUBLETHINK But deeper than this lies the original motive, the never-questioned instinct that first led to the seizure of power and brought DOUBLETHINK, the Thought Police, continuous warfare, and all the other neces- sary paraphernalia into existence afterwards.

This motive really consists...

Winston became aware of silence, as one becomes aware of a new sound.

It seemed to him that Julia had been very still for some time past.

She was lying on her side, naked from the waist upwards, with her cheek pillowed on her hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes.

Her breast rose and fell slowly and reg- ularly.

'Julia.' No answer.

'Julia, are you awake?' No answer.

She was asleep.

He shut the book, put it carefully on the floor, lay down, and pulled the coverlet over both of them.

He had still, he reflected, not learned the ultimate secret.

He understood HOW; he did not understand WHY.

Chapter I, like Chapter III, had not actually told him anything that he did not know, it had merely systematized the knowledge that he possessed already.

But after reading it he knew better than before that he was not mad.

Being in a minority, even a minority of one, did not make you mad.

There was truth and there was untruth, and if you clung to the truth even against the whole world, you were not mad.

A yellow beam from the sinking sun slanted in through the window and fell across the pillow.

He shut his eyes.

The sun on his face and the girl's smooth body touching his own gave him a strong, sleepy, confident feeling.

He was safe, everything was all right.

He fell asleep murmuring 'Sanity is not statistical,' with the feeling that this remark contained in it a profound wisdom.

***** When he woke it was with the sensation of having slept for a long time, but a glance at the old-fashioned clock told him that it was only twenty-thirty.

He lay dozing for a while; then the usual deep- lunged singing struck up from the yard below: 'It was only an 'opeless fancy, It passed like an Ipril dye, But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye!' The drivelling song seemed to have kept its popularity.

You still heard it all over the place.

It had outlived the Hate Song.

Julia woke at the sound, stretched herself luxuriously, and got out of bed.

'I'm hungry,' she said.

'Let's make some more coffee.

Damn!

The stove's gone out and the water's cold.' She picked the stove up and shook it.

'There's no oil in it.' 'We can get some from old Charrington, I expect.' 'The funny thing is I made sure it was full.

I'm going to put my clothes on,' she added.

'It seems to have got colder.' Winston also got up and dressed himself.

The indefatigable voice sang on: 'They sye that time 'eals all things, They sye you can always forget; But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the years They twist my 'eart-strings yet!' As he fastened the belt of his overalls he strolled across to the window.

The sun must have gone down behind the houses; it was not shining into the yard any longer.

The flagstones were wet as though they had just been washed, and he had the feeling that the sky had been washed too, so fresh and pale was the blue between the chimney-pots.

Tirelessly the woman marched to and fro, cork- ing and uncorking herself, singing and falling silent, and pegging out more diapers, and more and yet more.

He wondered whether she took in washing for a living or was merely the slave of twenty or thirty grandchildren.

Julia had come across to his side; together they gazed down with a sort of fascination at the sturdy figure below.

As he looked at the woman in her characteristic attitude, her thick arms reaching up for the line, her powerful mare-like buttocks protruded, it struck him for the first time that she was beautiful.

It had never before occurred to him that the body of a woman of fifty, blown up to monstrous dimensions by childbear- ing, then hardened, roughened by work till it was coarse in the grain like an over-ripe turnip, could be beautiful.

But it was so, and after all, he thought, why not?

The solid, contourless body, like a block of granite, and the rasping red skin, bore the same relation to the body of a girl as the rose-hip to the rose.

Why should the fruit be held inferior to the flower?

'She's beautiful,' he murmured.

'She's a metre across the hips, easily,' said Julia.

'That is her style of beauty,' said Winston.

He held Julia's supple waist easily encircled by his arm.

From the hip to the knee her flank was against his.

Out of their bodies no child would ever come.

That was the one thing they could never do.

Only by word of mouth, from mind to mind, could they pass on the secret.

The woman down there had no mind, she had only strong arms, a warm heart, and a fertile belly.

He wondered how many children she had given birth to.

It might easily be fif- teen.

She had had her momentary flowering, a year, perhaps, of wild-rose beauty and then she had suddenly swollen like a fertil- ized fruit and grown hard and red and coarse, and then her life had been laundering, scrubbing, darning, cooking, sweeping, pol- ishing, mending, scrubbing, laundering, first for children, then for grandchildren, over thirty unbroken years.

At the end of it she was still singing.

The mystical reverence that he felt for her was somehow mixed up with the aspect of the pale, cloudless sky, stretching away behind the chimney-pots into interminable dis- tance.

It was curious to think that the sky was the same for everybody, in Eurasia or Eastasia as well as here.

And the people under the sky were also very much the same- everywhere, all over the world, hundreds of thousands of millions of people just like this, people ignorant of one another's existence, held apart by walls of hatred and lies, and yet almost exactly the same- people who had never learned to think but who were storing up in their hearts and bellies and muscles the power that would one day over- turn the world.

If there was hope, it lay in the proles!

Without having read to the end of THE BOOK, he knew that that must be Goldstein's final message.

The future belonged to the proles.

And could he be sure that when their time came the world they con- structed would not be just as alien to him, Winston Smith, as the world of the Party?

Yes, because at the least it would be a world of sanity.

Where there is equality there can be sanity.

Sooner or later it would happen, strength would change into consciousness.

The proles were immortal, you could not doubt it when you looked at that valiant figure in the yard.

In the end their awaken- ing would come.

And until that happened, though it might be a thousand years, they would stay alive against all the odds, like birds, passing on from body to body the vitality which the Party did not share and could not kill.

'Do you remember,' he said, 'the thrush that sang to us, that first day, at the edge of the wood?' 'He wasn't singing to us,' said Julia.

'He was singing to please himself.

Not even that.

He was just singing.' The birds sang, the proles sang.

the Party did not sing.

All round the world, in London and New York, in Africa and Brazil, and in the mysterious, forbidden lands beyond the frontiers, in the streets of Paris and Berlin, in the villages of the endless Russian plain, in the bazaars of China and Japan- everywhere stood the same solid unconquerable figure, made monstrous by work and childbearing, toiling from birth to death and still singing.

Out of those mighty loins a race of conscious beings must one day come.

You were the dead, theirs was the future.

But you could share in that future if you kept alive the mind as they kept alive the body, and passed on the secret doctrine that two plus two make four.

'We are the dead,' he said.

'We are the dead,' echoed Julia dutifully.

'You are the dead,' said an iron voice behind them.

They sprang apart.

Winston's entrails seemed to have turned into ice.

He could see the white all round the irises of Julia's eyes.

Her face had turned a milky yellow.

The smear of rouge that was still on each cheekbone stood out sharply, almost as though unconnected with the skin beneath.

'You are the dead,' repeated the iron voice.

'It was behind the picture,' breathed Julia.

'It was behind the picture,' said the voice.

'Remain exactly where you are.

Make no movement until you are ordered.' It was starting, it was starting at last!

They could do nothing except stand gazing into one another's eyes.

To run for life, to get out of the house before it was too late- no such thought occurred to them.

Unthinkable to disobey the iron voice from the wall.

There was a snap as though a catch had been turned back, and a crash of breaking glass.

The picture had fallen to the floor uncov- ering the telescreen behind it.

'Now they can see us,' said Julia.

'Now we can see you,' said the voice.

'Stand out in the middle of the room.

Stand back to back.

Clasp your hands behind your heads.

Do not touch one another.' They were not touching, but it seemed to him that he could feel Julia's body shaking.

Or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own.

He could just stop his teeth from chattering, but his knees were beyond his control.

There was a sound of trampling boots below, inside the house and outside.

The yard seemed to be full of men.

Something was being dragged across the stones.

The woman's singing had stopped abruptly.

There was a long, rolling clang, as though the washtub had been flung across the yard, and then a confusion of angry shouts which ended in a yell of pain.

'The house is surrounded,' said Winston.

'The house is surrounded,' said the voice.

He heard Julia snap her teeth together.

'I suppose we may as well say good-bye,' she said.

'You may as well say good-bye,' said the voice.

And then another quite different voice, a thin, cultivated voice which Winston had the impression of having heard before, struck in; 'And by the way, while we are on the subject, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head"!' Something crashed on to the bed behind Winston's back.

The head of a ladder had been thrust through the window and had burst in the frame.

Someone was climbing through the window.

There was a stampede of boots up the stairs.

The room was full of solid men in black uniforms, with iron-shod boots on their feet and truncheons in their hands.

Winston was not trembling any longer.

Even his eyes he barely moved.

One thing alone mattered; to keep still, to keep still and not give them an excuse to hit you!

A man with a smooth prize- fighter's jowl in which the mouth was only a slit paused opposite him balancing his truncheon meditatively between thumb and forefinger.

Winston met his eyes.

The feeling of nakedness, with one's hands behind one's head and one's face and body all exposed, was almost unbearable.

The man protruded the tip of a white tongue, licked the place where his lips should have been, and then passed on.

There was another crash.

Someone had picked up the glass paperweight from the table and smashed it to pieces on the hearth-stone.

The fragment of coral, a tiny crinkle of pink like a sugar rose- bud from a cake, rolled across the mat.

How small, thought Winston, how small it always was!

There was a gasp and a thump behind him, and he received a violent kick on the ankle which nearly flung him off his balance.

One of the men had smashed his fist into Julia's solar plexus, doubling her up like a pocket ruler.

She was thrashing about on the floor, fighting for breath.

Winston dared not turn his head even by a millimetre, but sometimes her livid, gasping face came within the angle of his vision.

Even in his terror it was as though he could feel the pain in his own body, the deadly pain which nevertheless was less urgent than the struggle to get back her breath.

He knew what it was like; the terrible, ago- nizing pain which was there all the while but could not be suffered yet, because before all else it was necessary to be able to breathe.

Then two of the men hoisted her up by knees and shoulders, and carried her out of the room like a sack.

Winston had a glimpse of her face, upside down, yellow and contorted, with the eyes shut, and still with a smear of rouge on either cheek; and that was the last he saw of her.

He stood dead still.

No one had hit him yet.

Thoughts which came of their own accord but seemed totally uninteresting began to flit through his mind.

He wondered whether they had got Mr Charrington.

He wondered what they had done to the woman in the yard.

He noticed that he badly wanted to urinate, and felt a faint surprise, because he had done so only two or three hours ago.

He noticed that the clock on the mantelpiece said nine, mean- ing twenty-one.

But the light seemed too strong.

Would not the light be fading at twenty-one hours on an August evening?

He wondered whether after all he and Julia had mistaken the time- had slept the clock round and thought it was twenty-thirty when really it was nought eight-thirty on the following morning.

But he did not pursue the thought further.

It was not interesting.

There was another, lighter step in the passage.

Mr Charrington came into the room.

The demeanour of the black-uniformed men suddenly became more subdued.

Something had also changed in Mr Charrington's appearance.

His eye fell on the fragments of the glass paperweight.

'Pick up those pieces,' he said sharply.

A man stooped to obey.

The cockney accent had disappeared; Winston suddenly realized whose voice it was that he had heard a few moments ago on the telescreen.

Mr Charrington was still wearing his old velvet jacket, but his hair, which had been almost white, had turned black.

Also he was not wearing his spectacles.

He gave Winston a single sharp glance, as though verifying his identity, and then paid no more attention to him.

He was still rec- ognizable, but he was not the same person any longer.

His body had straightened, and seemed to have grown bigger.

His face had undergone only tiny changes that had nevertheless worked a com- plete transformation.

The black eyebrows were less bushy, the wrinkles were gone, the whole lines of the face seemed to have altered; even the nose seemed shorter.

It was the alert, cold face of a man of about five-and-thirty.

It occurred to Winston that for the first time in his life he was looking, with knowledge, at a member of the Thought Police.

PART THREE He did not know where he was.

Presumably he was in the Ministry of Love, but there was no way of making certain.

He was in a high-ceilinged windowless cell with walls of glittering white porcelain.

Concealed lamps flooded it with cold light, and there was a low, steady humming sound which he supposed had some- thing to do with the air supply.

A bench, or shelf, just wide enough to sit on ran round the wall, broken only by the door and, at the end opposite the door, a lavatory pan with no wooden seat.

There were four telescreens, one in each wall.

There was a dull aching in his belly.

It had been there ever since they had bundled him into the closed van and driven him away.

But he was also hungry, with a gnawing, unwholesome kind of hunger.

It might be twenty-four hours since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six.

He still did not know, probably never would know, whether it had been morning or evening when they arrested him.

Since he was arrested he had not been fed.

He sat as still as he could on the narrow bench, with his hands crossed on his knee.

He had already learned to sit still.

If you made unexpected movements they yelled at you from the tele- screen.

But the craving for food was growing upon him.

What he longed for above all was a piece of bread.

He had an idea that there were a few breadcrumbs in the pocket of his overalls.

It was even possible- he thought this because from time to time some- thing seemed to tickle his leg- that there might be a sizeable bit of crust there.

In the end the temptation to find out overcame his fear; he slipped a hand into his pocket.

'Smith!' yelled a voice from the telescreen.

'6079 Smith W.!

Hands out of pockets in the cells!' He sat still again, his hands crossed on his knee.

Before being brought here he had been taken to another place which must have been an ordinary prison or a temporary lock-up used by the patrols.

He did not know how long he had been there; some hours at any rate; with no clocks and no daylight it was hard to gauge the time.

It was a noisy, evil-smelling place.

They had put him into a cell similar to the one he was now in, but filthily dirty and at all times crowded by ten or fifteen people.

The majority of them were common criminals, but there were a few political prisoners among them.

He had sat silent against the wall, jostled by dirty bodies, too preoccupied by fear and the pain in his belly to take much interest in his surroundings, but still noticing the astonishing dif- ference in demeanour between the Party prisoners and the others.

The Party prisoners were always silent and terrified, but the ordi- nary criminals seemed to care nothing for anybody.

They yelled insults at the guards, fought back fiercely when their belongings were impounded, wrote obscene words on the floor, ate smuggled food which they produced from mysterious hiding-places in their clothes, and even shouted down the telescreen when it tried to restore order.

On the other hand some of them seemed to be on good terms with the guards, called them by nicknames, and tried to wheedle cigarettes through the spyhole in the door.

The guards, too, treated the common criminals with a certain forbearance, even when they had to handle them roughly.

There was much talk about the forced-labour camps to which most of the prisoners expected to be sent.

It was 'all right' in the camps, he gathered, so long as you had good contacts and knew the ropes.

There was bribery, favouritism, and racketeering of every kind, there was homosexuality and prostitution, there was even illicit alcohol dis- tilled from potatoes.

The positions of trust were given only to the common criminals, especially the gangsters and the murderers, who formed a sort of aristocracy.

All the dirty jobs were done by the politicals.

There was a constant come-and-go of prisoners of every description: drug-peddlers, thieves, bandits, black-marketeers, drunks, prostitutes.

Some of the drunks were so violent that the other prisoners had to combine to suppress them.

An enormous wreck of a woman, aged about sixty, with great tumbling breasts and thick coils of white hair which had come down in her strug- gles, was carried in, kicking and shouting, by four guards, who had hold of her one at each corner.

They wrenched off the boots with which she had been trying to kick them, and dumped her down across Winston's lap, almost breaking his thigh-bones.

The woman hoisted herself upright and followed them out with a yell of 'F-- bastards!' Then, noticing that she was sitting on some- thing uneven, she slid off Winston's knees on to the bench.

'Beg pardon, dearie,' she said.

'I wouldn't 'a sat on you, only the buggers put me there.

They dono 'ow to treat a lady, do they?' She paused, patted her breast, and belched.

'Pardon,' she said, 'I ain't meself, quite.' She leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor.

'Thass better,' she said, leaning back with closed eyes.

'Never keep it down, thass what I say.

Get it up while it's fresh on your stomach, like.' She revived, turned to have another look at Winston and seemed immediately to take a fancy to him.

She put a vast arm round his shoulder and drew him towards her, breathing beer and vomit into his face.

'Wass your name, dearie?' she said.

'Smith,' said Winston.

'Smith?' said the woman.

'Thass funny.

My name's Smith too.

Why,' she added sentimentally, 'I might be your mother!' She might, thought Winston, be his mother.

She was about the right age and physique, and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twenty years in a forced-labour camp.

No one else had spoken to him.

To a surprising extent the ordi- nary criminals ignored the Party prisoners.

'The polITS,' they called them, with a sort of uninterested contempt.

The Party pris- oners seemed terrified of speaking to anybody, and above all of speaking to one another.

Only once, when two Party members, both women, were pressed close together on the bench, he over- heard amid the din of voices a few hurriedly-whispered words; and in particular a reference to something called 'room one-oh- one', which he did not understand.

It might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here.

The dull pain in his belly never went away, but sometimes it grew better and sometimes worse, and his thoughts expanded or contracted accordingly.

When it grew worse he thought only of the pain itself, and of his desire for food.

When it grew better, panic took hold of him.

There were moments when he foresaw the things that would happen to him with such actuality that his heart galloped and his breath stopped.

He felt the smash of trun- cheons on his elbows and iron-shod boots on his shins; he saw himself grovelling on the floor, screaming for mercy through broken teeth.

He hardly thought of Julia.

He could not fix his mind on her.

He loved her and would not betray her; but that was only a fact, known as he knew the rules of arithmetic.

He felt no love for her, and he hardly even wondered what was happening to her.

He thought oftener of O'Brien, with a flickering hope.

O'Brien might know that he had been arrested.

The Brotherhood, he had said, never tried to save its members.

But there was the razor blade; they would send the razor blade if they could.

There would be perhaps five seconds before the guard could rush into the cell.

The blade would bite into him with a sort of burning coldness, and even the fingers that held it would be cut to the bone.

Everything came back to his sick body, which shrank trem- bling from the smallest pain.

He was not certain that he would use the razor blade even if he got the chance.

It was more natural to exist from moment to moment, accepting another ten minutes' life even with the certainty that there was torture at the end of it.

Sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in the walls of the cell.

It should have been easy, but he always lost count at some point or another.

More often he wondered where he was, and what time of day it was.

At one moment he felt certain that it was broad daylight outside, and at the next equally certain that it was pitch darkness.

In this place, he knew instinc- tively, the lights would never be turned out.

It was the place with no darkness: he saw now why O'Brien had seemed to recognize the allusion.

In the Ministry of Love there were no windows.

His cell might be at the heart of the building or against its outer wall; it might be ten floors below ground, or thirty above it.

He moved himself mentally from place to place, and tried to determine by the feeling of his body whether he was perched high in the air or buried deep underground.

There was a sound of marching boots outside.

The steel door opened with a clang.

A young officer, a trim black-uniformed figure who seemed to glitter all over with polished leather, and whose pale, straight-featured face was like a wax mask, stepped smartly through the doorway.

He motioned to the guards outside to bring in the prisoner they were leading.

The poet Ampleforth shambled into the cell.

The door clanged shut again.

Ampleforth made one or two uncertain movements from side to side, as though having some idea that there was another door to go out of, and then began to wander up and down the cell.

He had not yet noticed Winston's presence.

His troubled eyes were gazing at the wall about a metre above the level of Winston's head.

He was shoeless; large, dirty toes were sticking out of the holes in his socks.

He was also several days away from a shave.

A scrubby beard covered his face to the cheekbones, giving him an air of ruffianism that went oddly with his large weak frame and nervous movements.

Winston roused himself a little from his lethargy.

He must speak to Ampleforth, and risk the yell from the telescreen.

It was even conceivable that Ampleforth was the bearer of the razor blade.

'Ampleforth,' he said.

There was no yell from the telescreen.

Ampleforth paused, mildly startled.

His eyes focused themselves slowly on Winston.

'Ah, Smith!' he said.

'You too!' 'What are you in for?' 'To tell you the truth- ' He sat down awkwardly on the bench opposite Winston.

'There is only one offence, is there not?' he said.

'And have you committed it?' 'Apparently I have.' He put a hand to his forehead and pressed his temples for a moment, as though trying to remember something.

'These things happen,' he began vaguely.

'I have been able to recall one instance- a possible instance.

It was an indiscretion, undoubtedly.

We were producing a definitive edition of the poems of Kipling.

I allowed the word "God"

to remain at the end of a line.

I could not help it!' he added almost indignantly, raising his face to look at Winston.

'It was impossible to change the line.

The rhyme was "rod".

Do you realize that there are only twelve rhymes to "rod"

in the entire language?

For days I had racked my brains.

There WAS no other rhyme.' The expression on his face changed.

The annoyance passed out of it and for a moment he looked almost pleased.

A sort of intel- lectual warmth, the joy of the pedant who has found out some useless fact, shone through the dirt and scrubby hair.

'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said, 'that the whole history of English poetry has been determined by the fact that the English language lacks rhymes?' No, that particular thought had never occurred to Winston.

Nor, in the circumstances, did it strike him as very important or interesting.

'Do you know what time of day it is?' he said.

Ampleforth looked startled again.

'I had hardly thought about it.

They arrested me- it could be two days ago- perhaps three.' His eyes flitted round the walls, as though he half expected to find a window somewhere.

'There is no difference between night and day in this place.

I do not see how one can calculate the time.' They talked desultorily for some minutes, then, without appar- ent reason, a yell from the telescreen bade them be silent.

Winston sat quietly, his hands crossed.

Ampleforth, too large to sit in com- fort on the narrow bench, fidgeted from side to side, clasping his lank hands first round one knee, then round the other.

The tele- screen barked at him to keep still.

Time passed.

Twenty minutes, an hour- it was difficult to judge.

Once more there was a sound of boots outside.

Winston's entrails contracted.

Soon, very soon, perhaps in five minutes, perhaps now, the tramp of boots would mean that his own turn had come.

The door opened.

The cold-faced young officer stepped into the cell.

With a brief movement of the hand he indicated Ampleforth.

'Room 101,' he said.

Ampleforth marched clumsily out between the guards, his face vaguely perturbed, but uncomprehending.

What seemed like a long time passed.

The pain in Winston's belly had revived.

His mind sagged round and round on the same trick, like a ball falling again and again into the same series of slots.

He had only six thoughts.

The pain in his belly; a piece of bread; the blood and the screaming; O'Brien; Julia; the razor blade.

There was another spasm in his entrails, the heavy boots were approaching.

As the door opened, the wave of air that it cre- ated brought in a powerful smell of cold sweat.

Parsons walked into the cell.

He was wearing khaki shorts and a sports-shirt.

This time Winston was startled into self-forgetfulness.

'YOU here!' he said.

Parsons gave Winston a glance in which there was neither inter- est nor surprise, but only misery.

He began walking jerkily up and down, evidently unable to keep still.

Each time he straightened his pudgy knees it was apparent that they were trembling.

His eyes had a wide-open, staring look, as though he could not prevent himself from gazing at something in the middle distance.

'What are you in for?' said Winston.

'Thoughtcrime!' said Parsons, almost blubbering.

The tone of his voice implied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulous horror that such a word could be applied to himself.

He paused opposite Winston and began eagerly appealing to him: 'You don't think they'll shoot me, do you, old chap?

They don't shoot you if you haven't actually done anything- only thoughts, which you can't help?

I know they give you a fair hear- ing.

Oh, I trust them for that!

They'll know my record, won't they?

YOU know what kind of chap I was.

Not a bad chap in my way.

Not brainy, of course, but keen.

I tried to do my best for the Party, didn't I?

I'll get off with five years, don't you think?

Or even ten years?

A chap like me could make himself pretty useful in a labour-camp.

They wouldn't shoot me for going off the rails just once?' 'Are you guilty?' said Winston.

'Of course I'm guilty!' cried Parsons with a servile glance at the telescreen.

'You don't think the Party would arrest an innocent man, do you?' His frog-like face grew calmer, and even took on a slightly sanctimonious expression.

'Thoughtcrime is a dreadful thing, old man,' he said sententiously.

'It's insidious.

It can get hold of you without your even knowing it.

Do you know how it got hold of me?

In my sleep!

Yes, that's a fact.

There I was, work- ing away, trying to do my bit- never knew I had any bad stuff in my mind at all.

And then I started talking in my sleep.

Do you know what they heard me saying?' He sank his voice, like someone who is obliged for medical rea- sons to utter an obscenity.

'"Down with Big Brother!"

Yes, I said that!

Said it over and over again, it seems.

Between you and me, old man, I'm glad they got me before it went any further.

Do you know what I'm going to say to them when I go up before the tribunal?

"Thank you,"

I'm going to say, "thank you for saving me before it was too late."' 'Who denounced you?' said Winston.

'It was my little daughter,' said Parsons with a sort of doleful pride.

'She listened at the keyhole.

Heard what I was saying, and nipped off to the patrols the very next day.

Pretty smart for a nipper of seven, eh?

I don't bear her any grudge for it.

In fact I'm proud of her.

It shows I brought her up in the right spirit, anyway.' He made a few more jerky movements up and down, several times, casting a longing glance at the lavatory pan.

Then he sud- denly ripped down his shorts.

'Excuse me, old man,' he said.

'I can't help it.

It's the waiting.' He plumped his large posterior into the lavatory pan.

Winston covered his face with his hands.

'Smith!' yelled the voice from the telescreen.

'6079 Smith W.!

Uncover your face.

No faces covered in the cells.' Winston uncovered his face.

Parsons used the lavatory, loudly and abundantly.

It then turned out that the plug was defective and the cell stank abominably for hours afterwards.

Parsons was removed.

More prisoners came and went, myste- riously.

One, a woman, was consigned to 'Room 101', and, Winston noticed, seemed to shrivel and turn a different colour when she heard the words.

A time came when, if it had been morning when he was brought here, it would be afternoon; or if it had been afternoon, then it would be midnight.

There were six prisoners in the cell, men and women.

All sat very still.

Opposite Winston there sat a man with a chinless, toothy face exactly like that of some large, harmless rodent.

His fat, mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottom that it was difficult not to believe that he had little stores of food tucked away there.

His pale-grey eyes flitted timorously from face to face and turned quickly away again when he caught anyone's eye.

The door opened, and another prisoner was brought in whose appearance sent a momentary chill through Winston.

He was a commonplace, mean-looking man who might have been an engi- neer or technician of some kind.

But what was startling was the emaciation of his face.

It was like a skull.

Because of its thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large, and the eyes seemed filled with a murderous, unappeasable hatred of some- body or something.

The man sat down on the bench at a little distance from Winston.

Winston did not look at him again, but the tormented, skull-like face was as vivid in his mind as though it had been straight in front of his eyes.

Suddenly he realized what was the matter.

The man was dying of starvation.

The same thought seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in the cell.

There was a very faint stirring all the way round the bench.

The eyes of the chinless man kept flitting towards the skull-faced man, then turning guiltily away, then being dragged back by an irre- sistible attraction.

Presently he began to fidget on his seat.

At last he stood up, waddled clumsily across the cell, dug down into the pocket of his overalls, and, with an abashed air, held out a grimy piece of bread to the skull-faced man.

There was a furious, deafening roar from the telescreen.

The chinless man jumped in his tracks.

The skull-faced man had quickly thrust his hands behind his back, as though demonstrat- ing to all the world that he refused the gift.

'Bumstead!' roared the voice.

'2713 Bumstead J.!

Let fall that piece of bread!' The chinless man dropped the piece of bread on the floor.

'Remain standing where you are,' said the voice.

'Face the door.

Make no movement.' The chinless man obeyed.

His large pouchy cheeks were quiv- ering uncontrollably.

The door clanged open.

As the young officer entered and stepped aside, there emerged from behind him a short stumpy guard with enormous arms and shoulders.

He took his stand opposite the chinless man, and then, at a signal from the officer, let free a frightful blow, with all the weight of his body behind it, full in the chinless man's mouth.

The force of it seemed almost to knock him clear of the floor.

His body was flung across the cell and fetched up against the base of the lavatory seat.

For a moment he lay as though stunned, with dark blood oozing from his mouth and nose.

A very faint whimpering or squeaking, which seemed unconscious, came out of him.

Then he rolled over and raised himself unsteadily on hands and knees.

Amid a stream of blood and saliva, the two halves of a dental plate fell out of his mouth.

The prisoners sat very still, their hands crossed on their knees.

The chinless man climbed back into his place.

Down one side of his face the flesh was darkening.

His mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry-coloured mass with a black hole in the middle of it.

From time to time a little blood dripped on to the breast of his overalls.

His grey eyes still flitted from face to face, more guiltily than ever, as though he were trying to discover how much the others despised him for his humiliation.

The door opened.

With a small gesture the officer indicated the skull-faced man.

'Room 101,' he said.

There was a gasp and a flurry at Winston's side.

The man had actually flung himself on his knees on the floor, with his hand clasped together.

'Comrade!

Officer!' he cried.

'You don't have to take me to that place!

Haven't I told you everything already?

What else is it you want to know?

There's nothing I wouldn't confess, nothing!

Just tell me what it is and I'll confess straight off.

Write it down and I'll sign it- anything!

Not room 101!' 'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man's face, already very pale, turned a colour Winston would not have believed possible.

It was definitely, unmistakably, a shade of green.

'Do anything to me!' he yelled.

'You've been starving me for weeks.

Finish it off and let me die.

Shoot me.

Hang me.

Sentence me to twenty-five years.

Is there somebody else you want me to give away?

Just say who it is and I'll tell you anything you want.

I don't care who it is or what you do to them.

I've got a wife and three children.

The biggest of them isn't six years old.

You can take the whole lot of them and cut their throats in front of my eyes, and I'll stand by and watch it.

But not Room 101!' 'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man looked frantically round at the other prisoners, as though with some idea that he could put another victim in his own place.

His eyes settled on the smashed face of the chinless man.

He flung out a lean arm.

'That's the one you ought to be taking, not me!' he shouted.

'You didn't hear what he was saying after they bashed his face.

Give me a chance and I'll tell you every word of it.

HE'S the one that's against the Party, not me.' The guards stepped forward.

The man's voice rose to a shriek.

'You didn't hear him!' he repeated.

'Something went wrong with the telescreen.

HE'S the one you want.

Take him, not me!' The two sturdy guards had stooped to take him by the arms.

But just at this moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed one of the iron legs that supported the bench.

He had set up a wordless howling, like an animal.

The guards took hold of him to wrench him loose, but he clung on with astonishing strength.

For perhaps twenty seconds they were hauling at him.

The prisoners sat quiet, their hands crossed on their knees, look- ing straight in front of them.

The howling stopped; the man had no breath left for anything except hanging on.

Then there was a different kind of cry.

A kick from a guard's boot had broken the fingers of one of his hands.

They dragged him to his feet.

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man was led out, walking unsteadily, with head sunken, nursing his crushed hand, all the fight had gone out of him.

A long time passed.

If it had been midnight when the skull- faced man was taken away, it was morning: if morning, it was afternoon.

Winston was alone, and had been alone for hours.

The pain of sitting on the narrow bench was such that often he got up and walked about, unreproved by the telescreen.

The piece of bread still lay where the chinless man had dropped it.

At the beginning it needed a hard effort not to look at it, but presently hunger gave way to thirst.

His mouth was sticky and evil-tasting.

The humming sound and the unvarying white light induced a sort of faintness, an empty feeling inside his head.

He would get up because the ache in his bones was no longer bearable, and then would sit down again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure of staying on his feet.

Whenever his physical sensations were a little under control the terror returned.

Sometimes with a fading hope he thought of O'Brien and the razor blade.

It was thinkable that the razor blade might arrive concealed in his food, if he were ever fed.

More dimly he thought of Julia.

Somewhere or other she was suffering perhaps far worse than he.

She might be screaming with pain at this moment.

He thought: 'If I could save Julia by doubling my own pain, would I do it?

Yes, I would.' But that was merely an intellectual decision, taken because he knew that he ought to take it.

He did not feel it.

In this place you could not feel anything, except pain and foreknowledge of pain.

Besides, was it possible, when you were actually suffering it, to wish for any reason that your own pain should increase?

But that question was not answerable yet.

The boots were approaching again.

The door opened.

O'Brien came in.

Winston started to his feet.

The shock of the sight had driven all caution out of him.

For the first time in many years he forgot the presence of the telescreen.

'They've got you too!' he cried.

'They got me a long time ago,' said O'Brien with a mild, almost regretful irony.

He stepped aside.

From behind him there emerged a broad-chested guard with a long black truncheon in his hand.

'You know this, Winston,' said O'Brien.

'Don't deceive your- self.

You did know it- you have always known it.' Yes, he saw now, he had always known it.

But there was no time to think of that.

All he had eyes for was the truncheon in the guard's hand.

It might fall anywhere; on the crown, on the tip of the ear, on the upper arm, on the elbow-- The elbow!

He had slumped to his knees, almost paralysed, clasping the stricken elbow with his other hand.

Everything had exploded into yellow light.

Inconceivable, inconceivable that one blow could cause such pain!

The light cleared and he could see the other two looking down at him.

The guard was laughing at his contortions.

One question at any rate was answered.

Never, for any reason on earth, could you wish for an increase of pain.

Of pain you could wish only one thing: that it should stop.

Nothing in the world was so bad as physical pain.

In the face of pain there are no heroes, no heroes, he thought over and over as he writhed on the floor, clutching uselessly at his disabled left arm.

He was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, except that it was higher off the ground and that he was fixed down in some way so that he could not move.

Light that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his face.

O'Brien was standing at his side, looking down at him intently.

At the other side of him stood a man in a white coat, holding a hypodermic syringe.

Even after his eyes were open he took in his surroundings only gradually.

He had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quite different world, a sort of underwater world far beneath it.

How long he had been down there he did not know.

Since the moment when they arrested him he had not seen dark- ness or daylight.

Besides, his memories were not continuous.

There had been times when consciousness, even the sort of con- sciousness that one has in sleep, had stopped dead and started again after a blank interval.

But whether the intervals were of days or weeks or only seconds, there was no way of knowing.

With that first blow on the elbow the nightmare had started.

Later he was to realize that all that then happened was merely a preliminary, a routine interrogation to which nearly all prisoners were subjected.

There was a long range of crimes- espionage, sabotage, and the like- to which everyone had to confess as a matter of course.

The confession was a formality, though the tor- ture was real.

How many times he had been beaten, how long the beatings had continued, he could not remember.

Always there were five or six men in black uniforms at him simultaneously.

Sometimes it was fists, sometimes it was truncheons, sometimes it was steel rods, sometimes it was boots.

There were times when he rolled about the floor, as shameless as an animal, writhing his body this way and that in an endless, hopeless effort to dodge the kicks, and simply inviting more and yet more kicks, in his ribs, in his belly, on his elbows, on his shins, in his groin, in his testicles, on the bone at the base of his spine.

There were times when it went on and on until the cruel, wicked, unforgivable thing seemed to him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he could not force himself into losing consciousness.

There were times when his nerve so forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beating began, when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enough to make him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes.

There were other times when he started out with the resolve of confessing nothing, when every word had to be forced out of him between gasps of pain, and there were times when he feebly tried to compromise, when he said to himself: 'I will confess, but not yet.

I must hold out till the pain becomes unbearable.

Three more kicks, two more kicks, and then I will tell them what they want.' Sometimes he was beaten till he could hardly stand, then flung like a sack of potatoes on to the stone floor of a cell, left to recuperate for a few hours, and then taken out and beaten again.

There were also longer periods of recovery.

He remembered them dimly, because they were spent chiefly in sleep or stupor.

He remembered a cell with a plank bed, a sort of shelf sticking out from the wall, and a tin wash-basin, and meals of hot soup and bread and sometimes coffee.

He remembered a surly barber arriving to scrape his chin and crop his hair, and businesslike, unsympathetic men in white coats feel- ing his pulse, tapping his reflexes, turning up his eyelids, running harsh fingers over him in search for broken bones, and shooting needles into his arm to make him sleep.

The beatings grew less frequent, and became mainly a threat, a horror to which he could be sent back at any moment when his answers were unsatisfactory.

His questioners now were not ruffi- ans in black uniforms but Party intellectuals, little rotund men with quick movements and flashing spectacles, who worked on him in relays over periods which lasted- he thought, he could not be sure- ten or twelve hours at a stretch.

These other questioners saw to it that he was in constant slight pain, but it was not chiefly pain that they relied on.

They slapped his face, wrung his ears, pulled his hair, made him stand on one leg, refused him leave to urinate, shone glaring lights in his face until his eyes ran with water; but the aim of this was simply to humiliate him and destroy his power of arguing and reasoning.

Their real weapon was the merciless questioning that went on and on, hour after hour, trip- ping him up, laying traps for him, twisting everything that he said, convicting him at every step of lies and self-contradiction until he began weeping as much from shame as from nervous fatigue.

Sometimes he would weep half a dozen times in a single session.

Most of the time they screamed abuse at him and threatened at every hesitation to deliver him over to the guards again; but some- times they would suddenly change their tune, call him comrade, appeal to him in the name of Ingsoc and Big Brother, and ask him sorrowfully whether even now he had not enough loyalty to the Party left to make him wish to undo the evil he had done.

When his nerves were in rags after hours of questioning, even this appeal could reduce him to snivelling tears.

In the end the nagging voices broke him down more completely than the boots and fists of the guards.

He became simply a mouth that uttered, a hand that signed, whatever was demanded of him.

His sole concern was to find out what they wanted him to confess, and then confess it quickly, before the bullying started anew.

He confessed to the assassination of eminent Party members, the distribution of sedi- tious pamphlets, embezzlement of public funds, sale of military secrets, sabotage of every kind.

He confessed that he had been a spy in the pay of the Eastasian government as far back as 1968.

He confessed that he was a religious believer, an admirer of capi- talism, and a sexual pervert.

He confessed that he had murdered his wife, although he knew, and his questioners must have known, that his wife was still alive.

He confessed that for years he had been in personal touch with Goldstein and had been a member of an underground organization which had included almost every human being he had ever known.

It was easier to confess every- thing and implicate everybody.

Besides, in a sense it was all true.

It was true that he had been the enemy of the Party, and in the eyes of the Party there was no distinction between the thought and the deed.

There were also memories of another kind.

They stood out in his mind disconnectedly, like pictures with blackness all round them.

He was in a cell which might have been either dark or light, because he could see nothing except a pair of eyes.

Near at hand some kind of instrument was ticking slowly and regularly.

The eyes grew larger and more luminous.

Suddenly he floated out of his seat, dived into the eyes, and was swallowed up.

He was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials, under daz- zling lights.

A man in a white coat was reading the dials.

There was a tramp of heavy boots outside.

The door clanged open.

The waxed-faced officer marched in, followed by two guards.

'Room 101,' said the officer.

The man in the white coat did not turn round.

He did not look at Winston either; he was looking only at the dials.

He was rolling down a mighty corridor, a kilometre wide, full of glorious, golden light, roaring with laughter and shouting out confessions at the top of his voice.

He was confessing everything, even the things he had succeeded in holding back under the tor- ture.

He was relating the entire history of his life to an audience who knew it already.

With him were the guards, the other ques- tioners, the men in white coats, O'Brien, Julia, Mr Charrington, all rolling down the corridor together and shouting with laughter.

Some dreadful thing which had lain embedded in the future had somehow been skipped over and had not happened.

Everything was all right, there was no more pain, the last detail of his life was laid bare, understood, forgiven.

He was starting up from the plank bed in the half-certainty that he had heard O'Brien's voice.

All through his interrogation, although he had never seen him, he had had the feeling that O'Brien was at his elbow, just out of sight.

It was O'Brien who was directing everything.

It was he who set the guards on to Winston and who prevented them from killing him.

It was he who decided when Winston should scream with pain, when he should have a respite, when he should be fed, when he should sleep, when the drugs should be pumped into his arm.

It was he who asked the questions and suggested the answers.

He was the tormentor, he was the protector, he was the inquisitor, he was the friend.

And once- Winston could not remember whether it was in drugged sleep, or in normal sleep, or even in a moment of wakefulness- a voice murmured in his ear: 'Don't worry, Winston; you are in my keeping.

For seven years I have watched over you.

Now the turning-point has come.

I shall save you, I shall make you perfect.' He was not sure whether it was O'Brien's voice; but it was the same voice that had said to him, 'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' in that other dream, seven years ago.

He did not remember any ending to his interrogation.

There was a period of blackness and then the cell, or room, in which he now was had gradually materialized round him.

He was almost flat on his back, and unable to move.

His body was held down at every essential point.

Even the back of his head was gripped in some manner.

O'Brien was looking down at him gravely and rather sadly.

His face, seen from below, looked coarse and worn, with pouches under the eyes and tired lines from nose to chin.

He was older than Winston had thought him; he was perhaps forty- eight or fifty.

Under his hand there was a dial with a lever on top and figures running round the face.

'I told you,' said O'Brien, 'that if we met again it would be here.' 'Yes,' said Winston.

Without any warning except a slight movement of O'Brien's hand, a wave of pain flooded his body.

It was a frightening pain, because he could not see what was happening, and he had the feel- ing that some mortal injury was being done to him.

He did not know whether the thing was really happening, or whether the effect was electrically produced; but his body was being wrenched out of shape, the joints were being slowly torn apart.

Although the pain had brought the sweat out on his forehead, the worst of all was the fear that his backbone was about to snap.

He set his teeth and breathed hard through his nose, trying to keep silent as long as possible.

'You are afraid,' said O'Brien, watching his face, 'that in another moment something is going to break.

Your especial fear is that it will be your backbone.

You have a vivid mental picture of the vertebrae snapping apart and the spinal fluid dripping out of them.

That is what you are thinking, is it not, Winston?' Winston did not answer.

O'Brien drew back the lever on the dial.

The wave of pain receded almost as quickly as it had come.

'That was forty,' said O'Brien.

'You can see that the numbers on this dial run up to a hundred.

Will you please remember, throughout our conversation, that I have it in my power to inflict pain on you at any moment and to whatever degree I choose?

If you tell me any lies, or attempt to prevaricate in any way, or even fall below your usual level of intelligence, you will cry out with pain, instantly.

Do you understand that?' 'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien's manner became less severe.

He resettled his specta- cles thoughtfully, and took a pace or two up and down.

When he spoke his voice was gentle and patient.

He had the air of a doctor, a teacher, even a priest, anxious to explain and persuade rather than to punish.

'I am taking trouble with you, Winston,' he said, 'because you are worth trouble.

You know perfectly well what is the matter with you.

You have known it for years, though you have fought against the knowledge.

You are mentally deranged.

You suffer from a defective memory.

You are unable to remember real events and you persuade yourself that you remember other events which never happened.

Fortunately it is curable.

You have never cured yourself of it, because you did not choose to.

There was a small effort of the will that you were not ready to make.

Even now, I am well aware, you are clinging to your disease under the impression that it is a virtue.

Now we will take an example.

At this moment, which power is Oceania at war with?' 'When I was arrested, Oceania was at war with Eastasia.' 'With Eastasia.

Good.

And Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia, has it not?' Winston drew in his breath.

He opened his mouth to speak and then did not speak.

He could not take his eyes away from the dial.

'The truth, please, Winston.

YOUR truth.

Tell me what you think you remember.' 'I remember that until only a week before I was arrested, we were not at war with Eastasia at all.

We were in alliance with them.

The war was against Eurasia.

That had lasted for four years.

Before that--' O'Brien stopped him with a movement of the hand.

'Another example,' he said.

'Some years ago you had a very serious delusion indeed.

You believed that three men, three one- time Party members named Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford- men who were executed for treachery and sabotage after making the fullest possible confession- were not guilty of the crimes they were charged with.

You believed that you had seen unmistakable documentary evidence proving that their confessions were false.

There was a certain photograph about which you had a halluci- nation.

You believed that you had actually held it in your hands.

It was a photograph something like this.' An oblong slip of newspaper had appeared between O'Brien's fingers.

For perhaps five seconds it was within the angle of Winston's vision.

It was a photograph, and there was no question of its identity.

It was THE photograph.

It was another copy of the photograph of Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford at the party func- tion in New York, which he had chanced upon eleven years ago and promptly destroyed.

For only an instant it was before his eyes, then it was out of sight again.

But he had seen it, unques- tionably he had seen it!

He made a desperate, agonizing effort to wrench the top half of his body free.

It was impossible to move so much as a centimetre in any direction.

For the moment he had even forgotten the dial.

All he wanted was to hold the photograph in his fingers again, or at least to see it.

'It exists!' he cried.

'No,' said O'Brien.

He stepped across the room.

There was a memory hole in the opposite wall.

O'Brien lifted the grating.

Unseen, the frail slip of paper was whirling away on the current of warm air; it was van- ishing in a flash of flame.

O'Brien turned away from the wall.

'Ashes,' he said.

'Not even identifiable ashes.

Dust.

It does not exist.

It never existed.' 'But it did exist!

It does exist!

It exists in memory.

I remember it.

You remember it.' 'I do not remember it,' said O'Brien.

Winston's heart sank.

That was doublethink.

He had a feeling of deadly helplessness.

If he could have been certain that O'Brien was lying, it would not have seemed to matter.

But it was perfectly possible that O'Brien had really forgotten the photograph.

And if so, then already he would have forgotten his denial of remember- ing it, and forgotten the act of forgetting.

How could one be sure that it was simple trickery?

Perhaps that lunatic dislocation in the mind could really happen: that was the thought that defeated him.

O'Brien was looking down at him speculatively.

More than ever he had the air of a teacher taking pains with a wayward but promising child.

'There is a Party slogan dealing with the control of the past,' he said.

'Repeat it, if you please.' '"Who controls the past controls the future: who controls the present controls the past,"' repeated Winston obediently.

'"Who controls the present controls the past,"' said O'Brien, nodding his head with slow approval.

'Is it your opinion, Winston, that the past has real existence?' Again the feeling of helplessness descended upon Winston.

His eyes flitted towards the dial.

He not only did not know whether 'yes' or 'no' was the answer that would save him from pain; he did not even know which answer he believed to be the true one.

O'Brien smiled faintly.

'You are no metaphysician, Winston,' he said.

'Until this moment you had never considered what is meant by existence.

I will put it more precisely.

Does the past exist concretely, in space?

Is there somewhere or other a place, a world of solid objects, where the past is still happening?' 'No.' 'Then where does the past exist, if at all?' 'In records.

It is written down.' 'In records.

And--?' 'In the mind.

In human memories.' 'In memory.

Very well, then.

We, the Party, control all records, and we control all memories.

Then we control the past, do we not?' 'But how can you stop people remembering things?' cried Winston again momentarily forgetting the dial.

'It is involuntary.

It is outside oneself.

How can you control memory?

You have not controlled mine!' O'Brien's manner grew stern again.

He laid his hand on the dial.

'On the contrary,' he said, 'YOU have not controlled it.

That is what has brought you here.

You are here because you have failed in humility, in self-discipline.

You would not make the act of sub- mission which is the price of sanity.

You preferred to be a lunatic, a minority of one.

Only the disciplined mind can see reality, Winston.

You believe that reality is something objective, external, existing in its own right.

You also believe that the nature of real- ity is self-evident.

When you delude yourself into thinking that you see something, you assume that everyone else sees the same thing as you.

But I tell you, Winston, that reality is not external.

Reality exists in the human mind, and nowhere else.

Not in the individual mind, which can make mistakes, and in any case soon perishes: only in the mind of the Party, which is collective and immortal.

Whatever the Party holds to be the truth, is truth.

It is impossible to see reality except by looking through the eyes of the Party.

That is the fact that you have got to relearn, Winston.

It needs an act of self-destruction, an effort of the will.

You must humble yourself before you can become sane.' He paused for a few moments, as though to allow what he had been saying to sink in.

'Do you remember,' he went on, 'writing in your diary, "Freedom is the freedom to say that two plus two make four"?' 'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien held up his left hand, its back towards Winston, with the thumb hidden and the four fingers extended.

'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?' 'Four.' 'And if the party says that it is not four but five- then how many?' 'Four.' The word ended in a gasp of pain.

The needle of the dial had shot up to fifty-five.

The sweat had sprung out all over Winston's body.

The air tore into his lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching his teeth he could not stop.

O'Brien watched him, the four fingers still extended.

He drew back the lever.

This time the pain was only slightly eased.

'How many fingers, Winston?' 'Four.' The needle went up to sixty.

'How many fingers, Winston?' 'Four!

Four!

What else can I say?

Four!' The needle must have risen again, but he did not look at it.

The heavy, stern face and the four fingers filled his vision.

The fingers stood up before his eyes like pillars, enormous, blurry, and seem- ing to vibrate, but unmistakably four.

'How many fingers, Winston?' 'Four!

Stop it, stop it!

How can you go on?

Four!

Four!' 'How many fingers, Winston?' 'Five!

Five!

Five!' 'No, Winston, that is no use.

You are lying.

You still think there are four.

How many fingers, please?' 'Four!

five!

Four!

Anything you like.

Only stop it, stop the pain!' Abruptly he was sitting up with O'Brien's arm round his shoul- ders.

He had perhaps lost consciousness for a few seconds.

The bonds that had held his body down were loosened.

He felt very cold, he was shaking uncontrollably, his teeth were chattering, the tears were rolling down his cheeks.

For a moment he clung to O'Brien like a baby, curiously comforted by the heavy arm round his shoulders.

He had the feeling that O'Brien was his protector, that the pain was something that came from outside, from some other source, and that it was O'Brien who would save him from it.

'You are a slow learner, Winston,' said O'Brien gently.

'How can I help it?' he blubbered.

'How can I help seeing what is in front of my eyes?

Two and two are four.' 'Sometimes, Winston.

Sometimes they are five.

Sometimes they are three.

Sometimes they are all of them at once.

You must try harder.

It is not easy to become sane.' He laid Winston down on the bed.

The grip of his limbs tight- ened again, but the pain had ebbed away and the trembling had stopped, leaving him merely weak and cold.

O'Brien motioned with his head to the man in the white coat, who had stood immo- bile throughout the proceedings.

The man in the white coat bent down and looked closely into Winston's eyes, felt his pulse, laid an ear against his chest, tapped here and there, then he nodded to O'Brien.

'Again,' said O'Brien.

The pain flowed into Winston's body.

The needle must be at seventy, seventy-five.

He had shut his eyes this time.

He knew that the fingers were still there, and still four.

All that mattered was somehow to stay alive until the spasm was over.

He had ceased to notice whether he was crying out or not.

The pain lessened again.

He opened his eyes.

O'Brien had drawn back the lever.

'How many fingers, Winston?' 'Four.

I suppose there are four.

I would see five if I could.

I am trying to see five.' 'Which do you wish: to persuade me that you see five, or really to see them?' 'Really to see them.' 'Again,' said O'Brien.

Perhaps the needle was eighty- ninety.

Winston could not intermittently remember why the pain was happening.

Behind his screwed-up eyelids a forest of fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance, weaving in and out, disappearing behind one another and reappearing again.

He was trying to count them, he could not remember why.

He knew only that it was impossible to count them, and that this was somehow due to the mysterious identity between five and four.

The pain died down again.

When he opened his eyes it was to find that he was still seeing the same thing.

Innumerable fingers, like moving trees, were still streaming past in either direction, crossing and recrossing.

He shut his eyes again.

'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston?' 'I don't know.

I don't know.

You will kill me if you do that again.

Four, five, six- in all honesty I don't know.' 'Better,' said O'Brien.

A needle slid into Winston's arm.

Almost in the same instant a blissful, healing warmth spread all through his body.

The pain was already half-forgotten.

He opened his eyes and looked up gratefully at O'Brien.

At sight of the heavy, lined face, so ugly and so intelligent, his heart seemed to turn over.

If he could have moved he would have stretched out a hand and laid it on O'Brien's arm.

He had never loved him so deeply as at this moment, and not merely because he had stopped the pain.

The old feeling, that at bottom it did not matter whether O'Brien was a friend or an enemy, had come back.

O'Brien was a person who could be talked to.

Perhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be understood.

O'Brien had tortured him to the edge of lunacy, and in a little while, it was certain, he would send him to his death.

It made no difference.

In some sense that went deeper than friendship, they were intimates: somewhere or other, although the actual words might never be spoken, there was a place where they could meet and talk.

O'Brien was looking down at him with an expression which suggested that the same thought might be in his own mind.

When he spoke it was in an easy, con- versational tone.

'Do you know where you are, Winston?' he said.

'I don't know.

I can guess.

In the Ministry of Love.' 'Do you know how long you have been here?' 'I don't know.

Days, weeks, months- I think it is months.' 'And why do you imagine that we bring people to this place?' 'To make them confess.' 'No, that is not the reason.

Try again.' 'To punish them.' 'No!' exclaimed O'Brien.

His voice had changed extraordinar- ily, and his face had suddenly become both stern and animated.

'No!

Not merely to extract your confession, not to punish you.

Shall I tell you why we have brought you here?

To cure you!

To make you sane!

Will you understand, Winston, that no one whom we bring to this place ever leaves our hands uncured?

We are not interested in those stupid crimes that you have committed.

The Party is not interested in the overt act: the thought is all we care about.

We do not merely destroy our enemies, we change them.

Do you understand what I mean by that?' He was bending over Winston.

His face looked enormous because of its nearness, and hideously ugly because it was seen from below.

Moreover it was filled with a sort of exaltation, a lunatic intensity.

Again Winston's heart shrank.

If it had been pos- sible he would have cowered deeper into the bed.

He felt certain that O'Brien was about to twist the dial out of sheer wantonness.

At this moment, however, O'Brien turned away.

He took a pace or two up and down.

Then he continued less vehemently: 'The first thing for you to understand is that in this place there are no martyrdoms.

You have read of the religious persecutions of the past.

In the Middle Ages there was the Inquisition.

It was a failure.

It set out to eradicate heresy, and ended by perpetuating it.

For every heretic it burned at the stake, thousands of others rose up.

Why was that?

Because the Inquisition killed its enemies in the open, and killed them while they were still unrepentant: in fact, it killed them because they were unrepentant.

Men were dying because they would not abandon their true beliefs.

Naturally all the glory belonged to the victim and all the shame to the Inquisitor who burned him.

Later, in the twentieth century, there were the totalitarians, as they were called.

There were the German Nazis and the Russian Communists.

The Russians perse- cuted heresy more cruelly than the Inquisition had done.

And they imagined that they had learned from the mistakes of the past; they knew, at any rate, that one must not make martyrs.

Before they exposed their victims to public trial, they deliberately set them- selves to destroy their dignity.

They wore them down by torture and solitude until they were despicable, cringing wretches, con- fessing whatever was put into their mouths, covering themselves with abuse, accusing and sheltering behind one another, whim- pering for mercy.

And yet after only a few years the same thing had happened over again.

The dead men had become martyrs and their degradation was forgotten.

Once again, why was it?

In the first place, because the confessions that they had made were obvi- ously extorted and untrue.

We do not make mistakes of that kind.

All the confessions that are uttered here are true.

We make them true.

And above all we do not allow the dead to rise up against us.

You must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, Winston.

Posterity will never hear of you.

You will be lifted clean out from the stream of history.

We shall turn you into gas and pour you into the stratosphere.

Nothing will remain of you, not a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain.

You will be annihilated in the past as well as in the future.

You will never have existed.' Then why bother to torture me?

thought Winston, with a momentary bitterness.

O'Brien checked his step as though Winston had uttered the thought aloud.

His large ugly face came nearer, with the eyes a little narrowed.

'You are thinking,' he said, 'that since we intend to destroy you utterly, so that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference- in that case, why do we go to the trouble of interro- gating you first?

That is what you were thinking, was it not?' 'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien smiled slightly.

'You are a flaw in the pattern, Winston.

You are a stain that must be wiped out.

Did I not tell you just now that we are different from the persecutors of the past?

We are not content with negative obedience, nor even with the most abject submission.

When finally you surrender to us, it must be of your own free will.

We do not destroy the heretic because he resists us: so long as he resists us we never destroy him.

We convert him, we capture his inner mind, we reshape him.

We burn all evil and all illusion out of him; we bring him over to our side, not in appear- ance, but genuinely, heart and soul.

We make him one of ourselves before we kill him.

It is intolerable to us that an erroneous thought should exist anywhere in the world, however secret and powerless it may be.

Even in the instant of death we cannot permit any deviation.

In the old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic, proclaiming his heresy, exulting in it.

Even the victim of the Russian purges could carry rebellion locked up in his skull as he walked down the passage waiting for the bullet.

But we make the brain perfect before we blow it out.

The command of the old despotisms was "Thou shalt not".

The command of the totalitar- ians was "Thou shalt".

Our command is "THOU ART".

No one whom we bring to this place ever stands out against us.

Everyone is washed clean.

Even those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you once believed- Jones, Aaronson, and interrogation myself.

I saw them gradually worn down, whimper- ing, grovelling, weeping- and in the end it was not with pain or fear, only with penitence.

By the time we had finished with them they were only the shells of men.

There was nothing left in them except sorrow for what they had done, and love of Big Brother.

It was touching to see how they loved him.

They begged to be shot quickly, so that they could die while their minds were still clean.' His voice had grown almost dreamy.

The exaltation, the lunatic enthusiasm, was still in his face.

He is not pretending, thought Winston, he is not a hypocrite, he believes every word he says.

What most oppressed him was the consciousness of his own intel- lectual inferiority.

He watched the heavy yet graceful form strolling to and fro, in and out of the range of his vision.

O'Brien was a being in all ways larger than himself.

There was no idea that he had ever had, or could have, that O'Brien had not long ago known, examined, and rejected.

His mind CONTAINED Winston's mind.

But in that case how could it be true that O'Brien was mad?

It must be he, Winston, who was mad.

O'Brien halted and looked down at him.

His voice had grown stern again.

'Do not imagine that you will save yourself, Winston, however completely you surrender to us.

No one who has once gone astray is ever spared.

And even if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life, still you would never escape from us.

What hap- pens to you here is for ever.

Understand that in advance.

We shall crush you down to the point from which there is no coming back.

Things will happen to you from which you could not recover, if you lived a thousand years.

Never again will you be capable of ordinary human feeling.

Everything will be dead inside you.

Never again will you be capable of love, or friendship, or joy of living, or laughter, or curiosity, or courage, or integrity.

You will be hollow.

We shall squeeze you empty, and then we shall fill you with our- selves.' He paused and signed to the man in the white coat.

Winston was aware of some heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind his head.

O'Brien had sat down beside the bed, so that his face was almost on a level with Winston's.

'Three thousand,' he said, speaking over Winston's head to the man in the white coat.

Two soft pads, which felt slightly moist, clamped themselves against Winston's temples.

He quailed.

There was pain coming, a new kind of pain.

O'Brien laid a hand reassuringly, almost kindly, on his.

'This time it will not hurt,' he said.

'Keep your eyes fixed on mine.' At this moment there was a devastating explosion, or what seemed like an explosion, though it was not certain whether there was any noise.

There was undoubtedly a blinding flash of light.

Winston was not hurt, only prostrated.

Although he had already been lying on his back when the thing happened, he had a curious feeling that he had been knocked into that position.

A terrific painless blow had flattened him out.

Also something had hap- pened inside his head.

As his eyes regained their focus he remembered who he was, and where he was, and recognized the face that was gazing into his own; but somewhere or other there was a large patch of emptiness, as though a piece had been taken out of his brain.

'It will not last,' said O'Brien.

'Look me in the eyes.

What country is Oceania at war with?' Winston thought.

He knew what was meant by Oceania and that he himself was a citizen of Oceania.

He also remembered Eurasia and Eastasia; but who was at war with whom he did not know.

In fact he had not been aware that there was any war.

'I don't remember.' 'Oceania is at war with Eastasia.

Do you remember that now?' 'Yes.' 'Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia.

Since the begin- ning of your life, since the beginning of the Party, since the beginning of history, the war has continued without a break, always the same war.

Do you remember that?' 'Yes.' 'Eleven years ago you created a legend about three men who had been condemned to death for treachery.

You pretended that you had seen a piece of paper which proved them innocent.

No such piece of paper ever existed.

You invented it, and later you grew to believe in it.

You remember now the very moment at which you first invented it.

Do you remember that?' 'Yes.' 'Just now I held up the fingers of my hand to you.

You saw five fingers.

Do you remember that?' 'Yes.' O'Brien held up the fingers of his left hand, with the thumb concealed.

'There are five fingers there.

Do you see five fingers?' 'Yes.' And he did see them, for a fleeting instant, before the scenery of his mind changed.

He saw five fingers, and there was no defor- mity.

Then everything was normal again, and the old fear, the hatred, and the bewilderment came crowding back again.

But there had been a moment- he did not know how long, thirty sec- onds, perhaps- of luminous certainty, when each new suggestion of O'Brien's had filled up a patch of emptiness and become absolute truth, and when two and two could have been three as easily as five, if that were what was needed.

It had faded but before O'Brien had dropped his hand; but though he could not recapture it, he could remember it, as one remembers a vivid expe- rience at some period of one's life when one was in effect a different person.

'You see now,' said O'Brien, 'that it is at any rate possible.' 'Yes,' said Winston.

O'Brien stood up with a satisfied air.

Over to his left Winston saw the man in the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of a syringe.

O'Brien turned to Winston with a smile.

In almost the old manner he resettled his spectacles on his nose.

'Do you remember writing in your diary,' he said, 'that it did not matter whether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person who understood you and could be talked to?

You were right.

I enjoy talking to you.

Your mind appeals to me.

It resem- bles my own mind except that you happen to be insane.

Before we bring the session to an end you can ask me a few questions, if you choose.' 'Any question I like?' 'Anything.' He saw that Winston's eyes were upon the dial.

'It is switched off.

What is your first question?' 'What have you done with Julia?' said Winston.

O'Brien smiled again.

'She betrayed you, Winston.

Immediately- unreservedly.

I have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly.

You would hardly recognize her if you saw her.

All her rebelliousness, her deceit, her folly, her dirty-minded- ness- everything has been burned out of her.

It was a perfect conversion, a textbook case.' 'You tortured her?' O'Brien left this unanswered.

'Next question,' he said.

'Does Big Brother exist?' 'Of course he exists.

The Party exists.

Big Brother is the embod- iment of the Party.' 'Does he exist in the same way as I exist?' 'You do not exist,' said O'Brien.

Once again the sense of helplessness assailed him.

He knew, or he could imagine, the arguments which proved his own nonexis- tence; but they were nonsense, they were only a play on words.

Did not the statement, 'You do not exist', contain a logical absurdity?

But what use was it to say so?

His mind shrivelled as he thought of the unanswerable, mad arguments with which O'Brien would demolish him.

'I think I exist,' he said wearily.

'I am conscious of my own identity.

I was born and I shall die.

I have arms and legs.

I occupy a particular point in space.

No other solid object can occupy the same point simultaneously.

In that sense, does Big Brother exist?' 'It is of no importance.

He exists.' 'Will Big Brother ever die?' 'Of course not.

How could he die?

Next question.' 'Does the Brotherhood exist?' 'That, Winston, you will never know.

If we choose to set you free when we have finished with you, and if you live to be ninety years old, still you will never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No.

As long as you live it will be an unsolved riddle in your mind.' Winston lay silent.

His breast rose and fell a little faster.

He still had not asked the question that had come into his mind the first.

He had got to ask it, and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter it.

There was a trace of amusement in O'Brien's face.

Even his spectacles seemed to wear an ironical gleam.

He knows, thought Winston suddenly, he knows what I am going to ask!

At the thought the words burst out of him: 'What is in Room 101?' The expression on O'Brien's face did not change.

He answered drily: 'You know what is in Room 101, Winston.

Everyone knows what is in Room 101.' He raised a finger to the man in the white coat.

Evidently the session was at an end.

A needle jerked into Winston's arm.

He sank almost instantly into deep sleep.

'There are three stages in your reintegration,' said O'Brien.

'There is learning, there is understanding, and there is acceptance.

It is time for you to enter upon the second stage.' As always, Winston was lying flat on his back.

But of late his bonds were looser.

They still held him to the bed, but he could move his knees a little and could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms from the elbow.

The dial, also, had grown to be less of a terror.

He could evade its pangs if he was quick-witted enough: it was chiefly when he showed stupidity that O'Brien pulled the lever.

Sometimes they got through a whole session with- out use of the dial.

He could not remember how many sessions there had been.

The whole process seemed to stretch out over a long, indefinite time- weeks, possibly- and the intervals between the sessions might sometimes have been days, sometimes only an hour or two.

'As you lie there,' said O'Brien, 'you have often wondered- you have even asked me- why the Ministry of Love should expend so much time and trouble on you.

And when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentially the same question.

You could grasp the mechanics of the Society you lived in, but not its underlying motives.

Do you remember writing in your diary, "I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY"?

It was when you thought about "why"

that you doubted your own sanity.

You have read THE BOOK, Goldstein's book, or parts of it, at least.

Did it tell you anything that you did not know already?' 'You have read it?' said Winston.

'I wrote it.

That is to say, I collaborated in writing it.

No book is produced individually, as you know.' 'Is it true, what it says?' 'As description, yes.

The programme it sets forth is nonsense.

The secret accumulation of knowledge- a gradual spread of enlightenment- ultimately a proletarian rebellion- the over- throw of the Party.

You foresaw yourself that that was what it would say.

It is all nonsense.

The proletarians will never revolt, not in a thousand years or a million.

They cannot.

I do not have to tell you the reason: you know it already.

If you have ever cher- ished any dreams of violent insurrection, you must abandon them.

There is no way in which the Party can be overthrown.

The rule of the Party is for ever.

Make that the starting-point of your thoughts.' He came closer to the bed.

'For ever!' he repeated.

'And now let us get back to the question of "how"

and "why".

You understand well enough HOW the Party maintains itself in power.

Now tell me WHY we cling to power.

What is our motive?

Why should we want power?

Go on, speak,' he added as Winston remained silent.

Nevertheless Winston did not speak for another moment or two.

A feeling of weariness had overwhelmed him.

The faint, mad gleam of enthusiasm had come back into O'Brien's face.

He knew in advance what O'Brien would say.

That the Party did not seek power for its own ends, but only for the good of the majority.

That it sought power because men in the mass were frail, cow- ardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth, and must be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger than themselves.

That the choice for mankind lay between freedom and happiness, and that, for the great bulk of mankind, happiness was better.

That the party was the eternal guardian of the weak, a dedicated sect doing evil that good might come, sacrificing its own happiness to that of others.

The terrible thing, thought Winston, the terrible thing was that when O'Brien said this he would believe it.

You could see it in his face.

O'Brien knew everything.

A thousand times better than Winston he knew what the world was really like, in what degradation the mass of human beings lived and by what lies and barbarities the Party kept them there.

He had understood it all, weighed it all, and it made no difference: all was justified by the ultimate purpose.

What can you do, thought Winston, against the lunatic who is more intelligent than yourself, who gives your arguments a fair hearing and then simply persists in his lunacy?

'You are ruling over us for our own good,' he said feebly.

'You believe that human beings are not fit to govern themselves, and therefore--' He started and almost cried out.

A pang of pain had shot through his body.

O'Brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty-five.

'That was stupid, Winston, stupid!' he said.

'You should know better than to say a thing like that.' He pulled the lever back and continued: 'Now I will tell you the answer to my question.

It is this.

The Party seeks power entirely for its own sake.

We are not interested in the good of others; we are interested solely in power.

Not wealth or luxury or long life or happiness: only power, pure power.

What pure power means you will understand presently.

We are different from all the oligarchies of the past, in that we know what we are doing.

All the others, even those who resembled our- selves, were cowards and hypocrites.

The German Nazis and the Russian Communists came very close to us in their methods, but they never had the courage to recognize their own motives.

They pretended, perhaps they even believed, that they had seized power unwillingly and for a limited time, and that just round the corner there lay a paradise where human beings would be free and equal.

We are not like that.

We know that no one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing it.

Power is not a means, it is an end.

One does not establish a dictatorship in order to safeguard a rev- olution; one makes the revolution in order to establish the dictatorship.

The object of persecution is persecution.

The object of torture is torture.

The object of power is power.

Now do you begin to understand me?' Winston was struck, as he had been struck before, by the tired- ness of O'Brien's face.

It was strong and fleshy and brutal, it was full of intelligence and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himself helpless; but it was tired.

There were pouches under the eyes, the skin sagged from the cheekbones.

O'Brien leaned over him, deliberately bringing the worn face nearer.

'You are thinking,' he said, 'that my face is old and tired.

You are thinking that I talk of power, and yet I am not even able to prevent the decay of my own body.

Can you not understand, Winston, that the individual is only a cell?

The weariness of the cell is the vigour of the organism.

Do you die when you cut your fingernails?' He turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again, one hand in his pocket.

'We are the priests of power,' he said.

'God is power.

But at present power is only a word so far as you are concerned.

It is time for you to gather some idea of what power means.

The first thing you must realize is that power is collective.

The individual only has power in so far as he ceases to be an individual.

You know the Party slogan: "Freedom is Slavery".

Has it ever occurred to you that it is reversible?

Slavery is freedom.

Alone- free- the human being is always defeated.

It must be so, because every human being is doomed to die, which is the greatest of all failures.

But if he can make complete, utter submission, if he can escape from his identity, if he can merge himself in the Party so that he IS the Party, then he is all-powerful and immortal.

The second thing for you to realize is that power is power over human beings.

Over the body- but, above all, over the mind.

Power over matter- external reality, as you would call it- is not important.

Already our control over matter is absolute.' For a moment Winston ignored the dial.

He made a violent effort to raise himself into a sitting position, and merely succeeded in wrenching his body painfully.

'But how can you control matter?' he burst out.

'You don't even control the climate or the law of gravity.

And there are dis- ease, pain, death--' O'Brien silenced him by a movement of his hand.

'We control matter because we control the mind.

Reality is inside the skull.

You will learn by degrees, Winston.

There is nothing that we could not do.

Invisibility, levitation- anything.

I could float off this floor like a soap bubble if I wish to.

I do not wish to, because the Party does not wish it.

You must get rid of those nineteenth- century ideas about the laws of Nature.

We make the laws of Nature.' 'But you do not!

You are not even masters of this planet.

What about Eurasia and Eastasia?

You have not conquered them yet.' 'Unimportant.

We shall conquer them when it suits us.

And if we did not, what difference would it make?

We can shut them out of existence.

Oceania is the world.' 'But the world itself is only a speck of dust.

And man is tiny- helpless!

How long has he been in existence?

For millions of years the earth was uninhabited.' 'Nonsense.

The earth is as old as we are, no older.

How could it be older?

Nothing exists except through human consciousness.' 'But the rocks are full of the bones of extinct animals- mam- moths and mastodons and enormous reptiles which lived here long before man was ever heard of.' 'Have you ever seen those bones, Winston?

Of course not.

Nineteenth-century biologists invented them.

Before man there was nothing.

After man, if he could come to an end, there would be nothing.

Outside man there is nothing.' 'But the whole universe is outside us.

Look at the stars!

Some of them are a million light-years away.

They are out of our reach for ever.' 'What are the stars?' said O'Brien indifferently.

'They are bits of fire a few kilometres away.

We could reach them if we wanted to.

Or we could blot them out.

The earth is the centre of the uni- verse.

The sun and the stars go round it.' Winston made another convulsive movement.

This time he did not say anything.

O'Brien continued as though answering a spoken objection: 'For certain purposes, of course, that is not true.

When we nav- igate the ocean, or when we predict an eclipse, we often find it convenient to assume that the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millions upon millions of kilometres away.

But what of it?

Do you suppose it is beyond us to produce a dual system of astronomy?

The stars can be near or distant, according as we need them.

Do you suppose our mathematicians are unequal to that?

Have you forgotten doublethink?' Winston shrank back upon the bed.

Whatever he said, the swift answer crushed him like a bludgeon.

And yet he knew, he KNEW, that he was in the right.

The belief that nothing exists outside your own mind- surely there must be some way of demonstrating that it was false?

Had it not been exposed long ago as a fallacy?

There was even a name for it, which he had forgotten.

A faint smile twitched the corners of O'Brien's mouth as he looked down at him.

'I told you, Winston,' he said, 'that metaphysics is not your strong point.

The word you are trying to think of is solipsism.

But you are mistaken.

This is not solipsism.

Collective solipsism, if you like.

But that is a different thing: in fact, the opposite thing.

All this is a digression,' he added in a different tone.

'The real power, the power we have to fight for night and day, is not power over things, but over men.' He paused, and for a moment assumed again his air of a schoolmaster questioning a promising pupil: 'How does one man assert his power over another, Winston?' Winston thought.

'By making him suffer,' he said.

'Exactly.

By making him suffer.

Obedience is not enough.

Unless he is suffering, how can you be sure that he is obeying your will and not his own?

Power is in inflicting pain and humiliation.

Power is in tearing human minds to pieces and putting them together again in new shapes of your own choosing.

Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we are creating?

It is the exact opposite of the stupid hedonistic Utopias that the old reformers imagined.

A world of fear and treachery and torment, a world of trampling and being trampled upon, a world which will grow not less but MORE merciless as it refines itself.

Progress in our world will be progress towards more pain.

The old civilizations claimed that they were founded on love or justice.

Ours is founded upon hatred.

In our world there will be no emotions except fear, rage, triumph, and self-abasement.

Everything else we shall destroy- everything.

Already we are breaking down the habits of thought which have survived from before the Revolution.

We have cut the links between child and parent, and between man and man, and between man and woman.

No one dares trust a wife or a child or a friend any longer.

But in the future there will be no wives and no friends.

Children will be taken from their mothers at birth, as one takes eggs from a hen.

The sex instinct will be eradicated.

Procreation will be an annual formality like the renewal of a ration card.

We shall abolish the orgasm.

Our neurologists are at work upon it now.

There will be no loyalty, except loyalty towards the Party.

There will be no love, except the love of Big Brother.

There will be no laughter, except the laugh of triumph over a defeated enemy.

There will be no art, no literature, no sci- ence.

When we are omnipotent we shall have no more need of science.

There will be no distinction between beauty and ugliness.

There will be no curiosity, no enjoyment of the process of life.

All competing pleasures will be destroyed.

But always- do not forget this, Winston- always there will be the intoxication of power, constantly increasing and constantly growing subtler.

Always, at every moment, there will be the thrill of victory, the sensation of trampling on an enemy who is helpless.

If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face- for ever.' He paused as though he expected Winston to speak.

Winston had tried to shrink back into the surface of the bed again.

He could not say anything.

His heart seemed to be frozen.

O'Brien went on: 'And remember that it is for ever.

The face will always be there to be stamped upon.

The heretic, the enemy of society, will always be there, so that he can be defeated and humiliated over again.

Everything that you have undergone since you have been in our hands- all that will continue, and worse.

The espionage, the betrayals, the arrests, the tortures, the executions, the disappear- ances will never cease.

It will be a world of terror as much as a world of triumph.

The more the Party is powerful, the less it will be tolerant: the weaker the opposition, the tighter the despotism.

Goldstein and his heresies will live for ever.

Every day, at every moment, they will be defeated, discredited, ridiculed, spat upon and yet they will always survive.

This drama that I have played out with you during seven years will be played out over and over again generation after generation, always in subtler forms.

Always we shall have the heretic here at our mercy, screaming with pain, broken up, contemptible- and in the end utterly penitent, saved from himself, crawling to our feet of his own accord.

That is the world that we are preparing, Winston.

A world of victory after victory, triumph after triumph after triumph: an endless pressing, pressing, pressing upon the nerve of power.

You are beginning, I can see, to realize what that world will be like.

But in the end you will do more than understand it.

You will accept it, welcome it, become part of it.' Winston had recovered himself sufficiently to speak.

'You can't!' he said weakly.

'What do you mean by that remark, Winston?' 'You could not create such a world as you have just described.

It is a dream.

It is impossible.' 'Why?' 'It is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and cruelty.

It would never endure.' 'Why not?' 'It would have no vitality.

It would disintegrate.

It would commit suicide.' 'Nonsense.

You are under the impression that hatred is more exhausting than love.

Why should it be?

And if it were, what dif- ference would that make?

Suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster.

Suppose that we quicken the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty.

Still what difference would it make?

Can you not understand that the death of the individual is not death?

The party is immortal.' As usual, the voice had battered Winston into helplessness.

Moreover he was in dread that if he persisted in his disagreement O'Brien would twist the dial again.

And yet he could not keep silent.

Feebly, without arguments, with nothing to support him except his inarticulate horror of what O'Brien had said, he returned to the attack.

'I don't know- I don't care.

Somehow you will fail.

Something will defeat you.

Life will defeat you.' 'We control life, Winston, at all its levels.

You are imagining that there is something called human nature which will be out- raged by what we do and will turn against us.

But we create human nature.

Men are infinitely malleable.

Or perhaps you have returned to your old idea that the proletarians or the slaves will arise and overthrow us.

Put it out of your mind.

They are helpless, like the animals.

Humanity is the Party.

The others are outside- irrelevant.' 'I don't care.

In the end they will beat you.

Sooner or later they will see you for what you are, and then they will tear you to pieces.' 'Do you see any evidence that that is happening?

Or any reason why it should?' 'No.

I believe it.

I KNOW that you will fail.

There is something in the universe- I don't know, some spirit, some principle- that you will never overcome.' 'Do you believe in God, Winston?' 'No.' 'Then what is it, this principle that will defeat us?' 'I don't know.

The spirit of Man.' 'And do you consider yourself a man?' 'Yes.' 'If you are a man, Winston, you are the last man.

Your kind is extinct; we are the inheritors.

Do you understand that you are ALONE?

You are outside history, you are non-existent.' His manner changed and he said more harshly: 'And you consider yourself morally superior to us, with our lies and our cruelty?' 'Yes, I consider myself superior.' O'Brien did not speak.

Two other voices were speaking.

After a moment Winston recognized one of them as his own.

It was a sound-track of the conversation he had had with O'Brien, on the night when he had enrolled himself in the Brotherhood.

He heard himself promising to lie, to steal, to forge, to murder, to encourage drug-taking and prostitution, to disseminate venereal diseases, to throw vitriol in a child's face.

O'Brien made a small impatient ges- ture, as though to say that the demonstration was hardly worth making.

Then he turned a switch and the voices stopped.

'Get up from that bed,' he said.

The bonds had loosened themselves.

Winston lowered himself to the floor and stood up unsteadily.

'You are the last man,' said O'Brien.

'You are the guardian of the human spirit.

You shall see yourself as you are.

Take off your clothes.' Winston undid the bit of string that held his overalls together.

The zip fastener had long since been wrenched out of them.

He could not remember whether at any time since his arrest he had taken off all his clothes at one time.

Beneath the overalls his body was looped with filthy yellowish rags, just recognizable as the remnants of underclothes.

As he slid them to the ground he saw that there was a three-sided mirror at the far end of the room.

He approached it, then stopped short.

An involuntary cry had broken out of him.

'Go on,' said O'Brien.

'Stand between the wings of the mirror.

You shall see the side view as well.' He had stopped because he was frightened.

A bowed, grey- coloured, skeleton-like thing was coming towards him.

Its actual appearance was frightening, and not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself.

He moved closer to the glass.

The creature's face seemed to be protruded, because of its bent carriage.

A forlorn, jailbird's face with a nobby forehead running back into a bald scalp, a crooked nose, and battered-looking cheekbones above which his eyes were fierce and watchful.

The cheeks were seamed, the mouth had a drawn-in look.

Certainly it was his own face, but it seemed to him that it had changed more than he had changed inside.

The emotions it registered would be different from the ones he felt.

He had gone partially bald.

For the first moment he had thought that he had gone grey as well, but it was only the scalp that was grey.

Except for his hands and a circle of his face, his body was grey all over with ancient, ingrained dirt.

Here and there under the dirt there were the red scars of wounds, and near the ankle the varicose ulcer was an inflamed mass with flakes of skin peeling off it.

But the truly frightening thing was the emacia- tion of his body.

The barrel of the ribs was as narrow as that of a skeleton: the legs had shrunk so that the knees were thicker than the thighs.

He saw now what O'Brien had meant about seeing the side view.

The curvature of the spine was astonishing.

The thin shoulders were hunched forward so as to make a cavity of the chest, the scraggy neck seemed to be bending double under the weight of the skull.

At a guess he would have said that it was the body of a man of sixty, suffering from some malignant disease.

'You have thought sometimes,' said O'Brien, 'that my face- the face of a member of the Inner Party- looks old and worn.

What do you think of your own face?' He seized Winston's shoulder and spun him round so that he was facing him.

'Look at the condition you are in!' he said.

'Look at this filthy grime all over your body.

Look at the dirt between your toes.

Look at that disgusting running sore on your leg.

Do you know that you stink like a goat?

Probably you have ceased to notice it.

Look at your emaciation.

Do you see?

I can make my thumb and forefinger meet round your bicep.

I could snap your neck like a carrot.

Do you know that you have lost twenty-five kilograms since you have been in our hands?

Even your hair is coming out in handfuls.

Look!' He plucked at Winston's head and brought away a tuft of hair.

'Open your mouth.

Nine, ten, eleven teeth left.

How many had you when you came to us?

And the few you have left are dropping out of your head.

Look here!' He seized one of Winston's remaining front teeth between his powerful thumb and forefinger.

A twinge of pain shot through Winston's jaw.

O'Brien had wrenched the loose tooth out by the roots.

He tossed it across the cell.

'You are rotting away,' he said; 'you are falling to pieces.

What are you?

A bag of filth.

Now turn around and look into that mirror again.

Do you see that thing facing you?

That is the last man.

If you are human, that is humanity.

Now put your clothes on again.' Winston began to dress himself with slow stiff movements.

Until now he had not seemed to notice how thin and weak he was.

Only one thought stirred in his mind: that he must have been in this place longer than he had imagined.

Then suddenly as he fixed the miserable rags round himself a feeling of pity for his ruined body overcame him.

Before he knew what he was doing he had collapsed on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and burst into tears.

He was aware of his ugliness, his gracelessness, a bundle of bones in filthy underclothes sitting weeping in the harsh white light: but he could not stop himself.

O'Brien laid a hand on his shoulder, almost kindly.

'It will not last for ever,' he said.

'You can escape from it when- ever you choose.

Everything depends on yourself.' 'You did it!' sobbed Winston.

'You reduced me to this state.' 'No, Winston, you reduced yourself to it.

This is what you accepted when you set yourself up against the Party.

It was all contained in that first act.

Nothing has happened that you did not foresee.' He paused, and then went on: 'We have beaten you, Winston.

We have broken you up.

You have seen what your body is like.

Your mind is in the same state.

I do not think there can be much pride left in you.

You have been kicked and flogged and insulted, you have screamed with pain, you have rolled on the floor in your own blood and vomit.

You have whimpered for mercy, you have betrayed everybody and everything.

Can you think of a single degradation that has not happened to you?' Winston had stopped weeping, though the tears were still oozing out of his eyes.

He looked up at O'Brien.

'I have not betrayed Julia,' he said.

O'Brien looked down at him thoughtfully.

'No,' he said; 'no; that is perfectly true.

You have not betrayed Julia.' The peculiar reverence for O'Brien, which nothing seemed able to destroy, flooded Winston's heart again.

How intelligent, he thought, how intelligent!

Never did O'Brien fail to understand what was said to him.

Anyone else on earth would have answered promptly that he HAD betrayed Julia.

For what was there that they had not screwed out of him under the torture?

He had told them everything he knew about her, her habits, her character, her past life; he had confessed in the most trivial detail everything that had happened at their meetings, all that he had said to her and she to him, their black-market meals, their adulteries, their vague plottings against the Party- everything.

And yet, in the sense in which he intended the word, he had not betrayed her.

He had not stopped loving her; his feelings towards her had remained the same.

O'Brien had seen what he meant without the need for explanation.

'Tell me,' he said, 'how soon will they shoot me?' 'It might be a long time,' said O'Brien.

'You are a difficult case.

But don't give up hope.

Everyone is cured sooner or later.

In the end we shall shoot you.' He was much better.

He was growing fatter and stronger every day, if it was proper to speak of days.

The white light and the humming sound were the same as ever, but the cell was a little more comfortable than the others he had been in.

There was a pillow and a mattress on the plank bed, and a stool to sit on.

They had given him a bath, and they allowed him to wash himself fairly frequently in a tin basin.

They even gave him warm water to wash with.

They had given him new under- clothes and a clean suit of overalls.

They had dressed his varicose ulcer with soothing ointment.

They had pulled out the remnants of his teeth and given him a new set of dentures.

Weeks or months must have passed.

It would have been possi- ble now to keep count of the passage of time, if he had felt any interest in doing so, since he was being fed at what appeared to be regular intervals.

He was getting, he judged, three meals in the twenty-four hours; sometimes he wondered dimly whether he was getting them by night or by day.

The food was surprisingly good, with meat at every third meal.

Once there was even a packet of cigarettes.

He had no matches, but the never-speaking guard who brought his food would give him a light.

The first time he tried to smoke it made him sick, but he persevered, and spun the packet out for a long time, smoking half a cigarette after each meal.

They had given him a white slate with a stump of pencil tied to the corner.

At first he made no use of it.

Even when he was awake he was completely torpid.

Often he would lie from one meal to the next almost without stirring, sometimes asleep, sometimes waking into vague reveries in which it was too much trouble to open his eyes.

He had long grown used to sleeping with a strong light on his face.

It seemed to make no difference, except that one's dreams were more coherent.

He dreamed a great deal all through this time, and they were always happy dreams.

He was in the Golden Country, or he was sitting among enormous glorious, sunlit ruins, with his mother, with Julia, with O'Brien- not doing anything, merely sitting in the sun, talking of peaceful things.

Such thoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his dreams.

He seemed to have lost the power of intellectual effort, now that the stimulus of pain had been removed.

He was not bored, he had no desire for conversation or distraction.

Merely to be alone, not to be beaten or questioned, to have enough to eat, and to be clean all over, was completely satisfying.

By degrees he came to spend less time in sleep, but he still felt no impulse to get off the bed.

All he cared for was to lie quiet and feel the strength gathering in his body.

He would finger himself here and there, trying to make sure that it was not an illusion that his muscles were growing rounder and his skin tauter.

Finally it was established beyond a doubt that he was growing fatter; his thighs were now definitely thicker than his knees.

After that, reluctantly at first, he began exercising himself regularly.

In a little while he could walk three kilometres, measured by pacing the cell, and his bowed shoulders were growing straighter.

He attempted more elaborate exercises, and was astonished and humiliated to find what things he could not do.

He could not move out of a walk, he could not hold his stool out at arm's length, he could not stand on one leg without falling over.

He squatted down on his heels, and found that with agonizing pains in thigh and calf he could just lift himself to a standing position.

He lay flat on his belly and tried to lift his weight by his hands.

It was hopeless, he could not raise himself a centimetre.

But after a few more days- a few more mealtimes- even that feat was accomplished.

A time came when he could do it six times running.

He began to grow actually proud of his body, and to cherish an intermittent belief that his face also was growing back to normal.

Only when he chanced to put his hand on his bald scalp did he remember the seamed, ruined face that had looked back at him out of the mirror.

His mind grew more active.

He sat down on the plank bed, his back against the wall and the slate on his knees, and set to work deliberately at the task of re-educating himself.

He had capitulated, that was agreed.

In reality, as he saw now, he had been ready to capitulate long before he had taken the deci- sion.

From the moment when he was inside the Ministry of Love- and yes, even during those minutes when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from the telescreen told them what to do- he had grasped the frivolity, the shallowness of his attempt to set himself up against the power of the Party.

He knew now that for seven years the Thought Police had watched him like a beetle under a magnifying glass.

There was no physical act, no word spoken aloud, that they had not noticed, no train of thought that they had not been able to infer.

Even the speck of whitish dust on the cover of his diary they had carefully replaced.

They had played sound-tracks to him, shown him photographs.

Some of them were photographs of Julia and himself.

Yes, even...

He could not fight against the Party any longer.

Besides, the Party was in the right.

It must be so; how could the immortal, collective brain be mistaken?

By what external standard could you check its judgements?

Sanity was statistical.

It was merely a question of learning to think as they thought.

Only--!

The pencil felt thick and awkward in his fingers.

He began to write down the thoughts that came into his head.

He wrote first in large clumsy capitals: FREEDOM IS SLAVERY Then almost without a pause he wrote beneath it: TWO AND TWO MAKE FIVE But then there came a sort of check.

His mind, as though shying away from something, seemed unable to concentrate.

He knew that he knew what came next, but for the moment he could not recall it.

When he did recall it, it was only by consciously reason- ing out what it must be: it did not come of its own accord.

He wrote: GOD IS POWER He accepted everything.

The past was alterable.

The past never had been altered.

Oceania was at war with Eastasia.

Oceania had always been at war with Eastasia.

Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford were guilty of the crimes they were charged with.

He had never seen the photograph that disproved their guilt.

It had never existed, he had invented it.

He remembered remembering contrary things, but those were false memories, products of self- deception.

How easy it all was!

Only surrender, and everything else followed.

It was like swimming against a current that swept you backwards however hard you struggled, and then suddenly deciding to turn round and go with the current instead of oppos- ing it.

Nothing had changed except your own attitude: the predestined thing happened in any case.

He hardly knew why he had ever rebelled.

Everything was easy, except--!

Anything could be true.

The so-called laws of Nature were non- sense.

The law of gravity was nonsense.

'If I wished,' O'Brien had said, 'I could float off this floor like a soap bubble.' Winston worked it out.

'If he THINKS he floats off the floor, and if I simul- taneously THINK I see him do it, then the thing happens.' Suddenly, like a lump of submerged wreckage breaking the sur- face of water, the thought burst into his mind: 'It doesn't really happen.

We imagine it.

It is hallucination.' He pushed the thought under instantly.

The fallacy was obvious.

It presupposed that somewhere or other, outside oneself, there was a 'real' world where 'real' things happened.

But how could there be such a world?

What knowledge have we of anything, save through our own minds?

All happenings are in the mind.

Whatever happens in all minds, truly happens.

He had no difficulty in disposing of the fallacy, and he was in no danger of succumbing to it.

He realized, nevertheless, that it ought never to have occurred to him.

The mind should develop a blind spot whenever a dangerous thought presented itself.

The process should be automatic, instinctive.

CRIMESTOP, they called it in Newspeak.

He set to work to exercise himself in crimestop.

He presented himself with propositions- 'the Party says the earth is flat', 'the party says that ice is heavier than water'- and trained himself in not seeing or not understanding the arguments that contradicted them.

It was not easy.

It needed great powers of reasoning and improvisation.

The arithmetical problems raised, for instance, by such a statement as 'two and two make five' were beyond his intellectual grasp.

It needed also a sort of athleticism of mind, an ability at one moment to make the most delicate use of logic and at the next to be unconscious of the crudest logical errors.

Stupidity was as necessary as intelligence, and as difficult to attain.

All the while, with one part of his mind, he wondered how soon they would shoot him.

'Everything depends on yourself,' O'Brien had said; but he knew that there was no conscious act by which he could bring it nearer.

It might be ten minutes hence, or ten years.

They might keep him for years in solitary confinement, they might send him to a labour-camp, they might release him for a while, as they sometimes did.

It was perfectly possible that before he was shot the whole drama of his arrest and interroga- tion would be enacted all over again.

The one certain thing was that death never came at an expected moment.

The tradition- the unspoken tradition: somehow you knew it, though you never heard it said- was that they shot you from behind; always in the back of the head, without warning, as you walked down a corri- dor from cell to cell.

One day- but 'one day' was not the right expression; just as probably it was in the middle of the night: once- he fell into a strange, blissful reverie.

He was walking down the corridor, wait- ing for the bullet.

He knew that it was coming in another moment.

Everything was settled, smoothed out, reconciled.

There were no more doubts, no more arguments, no more pain, no more fear.

His body was healthy and strong.

He walked easily, with a joy of movement and with a feeling of walking in sunlight.

He was not any longer in the narrow white corridors in the Ministry of Love, he was in the enormous sunlit passage, a kilometre wide, down which he had seemed to walk in the delirium induced by drugs.

He was in the Golden Country, following the foot-track across the old rabbit-cropped pasture.

He could feel the short springy turf under his feet and the gentle sunshine on his face.

At the edge of the field were the elm trees, faintly stirring, and somewhere beyond that was the stream where the dace lay in the green pools under the willows.

Suddenly he started up with a shock of horror.

The sweat broke out on his backbone.

He had heard himself cry aloud: 'Julia!

Julia!

Julia, my love!

Julia!' For a moment he had had an overwhelming hallucination of her presence.

She had seemed to be not merely with him, but inside him.

It was as though she had got into the texture of his skin.

In that moment he had loved her far more than he had ever done when they were together and free.

Also he knew that some- where or other she was still alive and needed his help.

He lay back on the bed and tried to compose himself.

What had he done?

How many years had he added to his servitude by that moment of weakness?

In another moment he would hear the tramp of boots outside.

They could not let such an outburst go unpunished.

They would know now, if they had not known before, that he was breaking the agreement he had made with them.

He obeyed the Party, but he still hated the Party.

In the old days he had hidden a heretical mind beneath an appearance of conformity.

Now he had retreated a step further: in the mind he had surrendered, but he had hoped to keep the inner heart inviolate.

He knew that he was in the wrong, but he preferred to be in the wrong.

They would under- stand that- O'Brien would understand it.

It was all confessed in that single foolish cry.

He would have to start all over again.

It might take years.

He ran a hand over his face, trying to familiarize himself with the new shape.

There were deep furrows in the cheeks, the cheekbones felt sharp, the nose flattened.

Besides, since last seeing himself in the glass he had been given a complete new set of teeth.

It was not easy to preserve inscrutability when you did not know what your face looked like.

In any case, mere control of the features was not enough.

For the first time he perceived that if you want to keep a secret you must also hide it from yourself.

You must know all the while that it is there, but until it is needed you must never let it emerge into your consciousness in any shape that could be given a name.

From now onwards he must not only think right; he must feel right, dream right.

And all the while he must keep his hatred locked up inside him like a ball of matter which was part of him- self and yet unconnected with the rest of him, a kind of cyst.

One day they would decide to shoot him.

You could not tell when it would happen, but a few seconds beforehand it should be possible to guess.

It was always from behind, walking down a cor- ridor.

Ten seconds would be enough.

In that time the world inside him could turn over.

And then suddenly, without a word uttered, without a check in his step, without the changing of a line in his face- suddenly the camouflage would be down and bang!

would go the batteries of his hatred.

Hatred would fill him like an enor- mous roaring flame.

And almost in the same instant bang!

would go the bullet, too late, or too early.

They would have blown his brain to pieces before they could reclaim it.

The heretical thought would be unpunished, unrepented, out of their reach for ever.

They would have blown a hole in their own perfection.

To die hating them, that was freedom.

He shut his eyes.

It was more difficult than accepting an intel- lectual discipline.

It was a question of degrading himself, mutilating himself.

He had got to plunge into the filthiest of filth.

What was the most horrible, sickening thing of all?

He thought of Big Brother.

The enormous face (because of constantly seeing it on posters he always thought of it as being a metre wide), with its heavy black moustache and the eyes that followed you to and fro, seemed to float into his mind of its own accord.

What were his true feelings towards Big Brother?

There was a heavy tramp of boots in the passage.

The steel door swung open with a clang.

O'Brien walked into the cell.

Behind him were the waxen-faced officer and the black-uniformed guards.

'Get up,' said O'Brien.

'Come here.' Winston stood opposite him.

O'Brien took Winston's shoulders between his strong hands and looked at him closely.

'You have had thoughts of deceiving me,' he said.

'That was stupid.

Stand up straighter.

Look me in the face.' He paused, and went on in a gentler tone: 'You are improving.

Intellectually there is very little wrong with you.

It is only emotionally that you have failed to make progress.

Tell me, Winston- and remember, no lies: you know that I am always able to detect a lie- tell me, what are your true feelings towards Big Brother?' 'I hate him.' 'You hate him.

Good.

Then the time has come for you to take the last step.

You must love Big Brother.

It is not enough to obey him: you must love him.' He released Winston with a little push towards the guards.

'Room 101,' he said.

At each stage of his imprisonment he had known, or seemed to know, whereabouts he was in the windowless building.

Possibly there were slight differences in the air pressure.

The cells where the guards had beaten him were below ground level.

The room where he had been interrogated by O'Brien was high up near the roof.

This place was many metres underground, as deep down as it was possible to go.

It was bigger than most of the cells he had been in.

But he hardly noticed his surroundings.

All he noticed was that there were two small tables straight in front of him, each covered with green baize.

One was only a metre or two from him, the other was further away, near the door.

He was strapped upright in a chair, so tightly that he could move nothing, not even his head.

A sort of pad gripped his head from behind, forcing him to look straight in front of him.

For a moment he was alone, then the door opened and O'Brien came in.

'You asked me once,' said O'Brien, 'what was in Room 101.

I told you that you knew the answer already.

Everyone knows it.

The thing that is in Room 101 is the worst thing in the world.' The door opened again.

A guard came in, carrying something made of wire, a box or basket of some kind.

He set it down on the further table.

Because of the position in which O'Brien was stand- ing.

Winston could not see what the thing was.

'The worst thing in the world,' said O'Brien, 'varies from indi- vidual to individual.

It may be burial alive, or death by fire, or by drowning, or by impalement, or fifty other deaths.

There are cases where it is some quite trivial thing, not even fatal.' He had moved a little to one side, so that Winston had a better view of the thing on the table.

It was an oblong wire cage with a handle on top for carrying it by.

Fixed to the front of it was some- thing that looked like a fencing mask, with the concave side outwards.

Although it was three or four metres away from him, he could see that the cage was divided lengthways into two com- partments, and that there was some kind of creature in each.

They were rats.

'In your case,' said O'Brien, 'the worst thing in the world hap- pens to be rats.' A sort of premonitory tremor, a fear of he was not certain what, had passed through Winston as soon as he caught his first glimpse of the cage.

But at this moment the meaning of the mask- like attachment in front of it suddenly sank into him.

His bowels seemed to turn to water.

'You can't do that!' he cried out in a high cracked voice.

'You couldn't, you couldn't!

It's impossible.' 'Do you remember,' said O'Brien, 'the moment of panic that used to occur in your dreams?

There was a wall of blackness in front of you, and a roaring sound in your ears.

There was some- thing terrible on the other side of the wall.

You knew that you knew what it was, but you dared not drag it into the open.

It was the rats that were on the other side of the wall.' 'O'Brien!' said Winston, making an effort to control his voice.

'You know this is not necessary.

What is it that you want me to do?' O'Brien made no direct answer.

When he spoke it was in the schoolmasterish manner that he sometimes affected.

He looked thoughtfully into the distance, as though he were addressing an audience somewhere behind Winston's back.

'By itself,' he said, 'pain is not always enough.

There are occa- sions when a human being will stand out against pain, even to the point of death.

But for everyone there is something unendurable- something that cannot be contemplated.

Courage and cowardice are not involved.

If you are falling from a height it is not cowardly to clutch at a rope.

If you have come up from deep water it is not cowardly to fill your lungs with air.

It is merely an instinct which cannot be destroyed.

It is the same with the rats.

For you, they are unendurable.

They are a form of pressure that you cannot withstand, even if you wished to.

You will do what is required of you.' 'But what is it, what is it?

How can I do it if I don't know what it is?' O'Brien picked up the cage and brought it across to the nearer table.

He set it down carefully on the baize cloth.

Winston could hear the blood singing in his ears.

He had the feeling of sitting in utter loneliness.

He was in the middle of a great empty plain, a flat desert drenched with sunlight, across which all sounds came to him out of immense distances.

Yet the cage with the rats was not two metres away from him.

They were enormous rats.

They were at the age when a rat's muzzle grows blunt and fierce and his fur brown instead of grey.

'The rat,' said O'Brien, still addressing his invisible audience, 'although a rodent, is carnivorous.

You are aware of that.

You will have heard of the things that happen in the poor quarters of this town.

In some streets a woman dare not leave her baby alone in the house, even for five minutes.

The rats are certain to attack it.

Within quite a small time they will strip it to the bones.

They also attack sick or dying people.

They show astonishing intelli- gence in knowing when a human being is helpless.' There was an outburst of squeals from the cage.

It seemed to reach Winston from far away.

The rats were fighting; they were trying to get at each other through the partition.

He heard also a deep groan of despair.

That, too, seemed to come from outside himself.

O'Brien picked up the cage, and, as he did so, pressed some- thing in it.

There was a sharp click.

Winston made a frantic effort to tear himself loose from the chair.

It was hopeless; every part of him, even his head, was held immovably.

O'Brien moved the cage nearer.

It was less than a metre from Winston's face.

'I have pressed the first lever,' said O'Brien.

'You understand the construction of this cage.

The mask will fit over your head, leaving no exit.

When I press this other lever, the door of the cage will slide up.

These starving brutes will shoot out of it like bullets.

Have you ever seen a rat leap through the air?

They will leap on to your face and bore straight into it.

Sometimes they attack the eyes first.

Sometimes they burrow through the cheeks and devour the tongue.' The cage was nearer; it was closing in.

Winston heard a suc- cession of shrill cries which appeared to be occurring in the air above his head.

But he fought furiously against his panic.

To think, to think, even with a split second left- to think was the only hope.

Suddenly the foul musty odour of the brutes struck his nostrils.

There was a violent convulsion of nausea inside him, and he almost lost consciousness.

Everything had gone black.

For an instant he was insane, a screaming animal.

Yet he came out of the blackness clutching an idea.

There was one and only one way to save himself.

He must interpose another human being, the BODY of another human being, between himself and the rats.

The circle of the mask was large enough now to shut out the vision of anything else.

The wire door was a couple of hand-spans from his face.

The rats knew what was coming now.

One of them was leaping up and down, the other, an old scaly grandfather of the sewers, stood up, with his pink hands against the bars, and fiercely sniffed the air.

Winston could see the whiskers and the yellow teeth.

Again the black panic took hold of him.

He was blind, helpless, mindless.

'It was a common punishment in Imperial China,' said O'Brien as didactically as ever.

The mask was closing on his face.

The wire brushed his cheek.

And then- no, it was not relief, only hope, a tiny fragment of hope.

Too late, perhaps too late.

But he had suddenly understood that in the whole world there was just ONE person to whom he could transfer his punishment- ONE body that he could thrust between himself and the rats.

And he was shouting frantically, over and over.

'Do it to Julia!

Do it to Julia!

Not me!

Julia!

I don't care what you do to her.

Tear her face off, strip her to the bones.

Not me!

Julia!

Not me!' He was falling backwards, into enormous depths, away from the rats.

He was still strapped in the chair, but he had fallen through the floor, through the walls of the building, through the earth, through the oceans, through the atmosphere, into outer space, into the gulfs between the stars- always away, away, away from the rats.

He was light years distant, but O'Brien was still standing at his side.

There was still the cold touch of wire against his cheek.

But through the darkness that enveloped him he heard another metallic click, and knew that the cage door had clicked shut and not open.

The Chestnut Tree was almost empty.

A ray of sunlight slanting through a window fell on dusty table-tops.

It was the lonely hour of fifteen.

A tinny music trickled from the telescreens.

Winston sat in his usual corner, gazing into an empty glass.

Now and again he glanced up at a vast face which eyed him from the opposite wall.

BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the cap- tion said.

Unbidden, a waiter came and filled his glass up with Victory Gin, shaking into it a few drops from another bottle with a quill through the cork.

It was saccharine flavoured with cloves, the speciality of the cafe.

Winston was listening to the telescreen.

At present only music was coming out of it, but there was a possibility that at any moment there might be a special bulletin from the Ministry of Peace.

The news from the African front was disquieting in the extreme.

On and off he had been worrying about it all day.

A Eurasian army (Oceania was at war with Eurasia: Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia) was moving southward at terri- fying speed.

The mid-day bulletin had not mentioned any definite area, but it was probable that already the mouth of the Congo was a battlefield.

Brazzaville and Leopoldville were in danger.

One did not have to look at the map to see what it meant.

It was not merely a question of losing Central Africa: for the first time in the whole war, the territory of Oceania itself was menaced.

A violent emotion, not fear exactly but a sort of undifferenti- ated excitement, flared up in him, then faded again.

He stopped thinking about the war.

In these days he could never fix his mind on any one subject for more than a few moments at a time.

He picked up his glass and drained it at a gulp.

As always, the gin made him shudder and even retch slightly.

The stuff was horrible.

The cloves and saccharine, themselves disgusting enough in their sickly way, could not disguise the flat oily smell; and what was worst of all was that the smell of gin, which dwelt with him night and day, was inextricably mixed up in his mind with the smell of those-- He never named them, even in his thoughts, and so far as it was possible he never visualized them.

They were something that he was half-aware of, hovering close to his face, a smell that clung to his nostrils.

As the gin rose in him he belched through purple lips.

He had grown fatter since they released him, and had regained his old colour- indeed, more than regained it.

His features had thickened, the skin on nose and cheekbones was coarsely red, even the bald scalp was too deep a pink.

A waiter, again unbidden, brought the chessboard and the current issue of 'The Times', with the page turned down at the chess problem.

Then, seeing that Winston's glass was empty, he brought the gin bottle and filled it.

There was no need to give orders.

They knew his habits.

The chessboard was always waiting for him, his corner table was always reserved; even when the place was full he had it to himself, since nobody cared to be seen sitting too close to him.

He never even bothered to count his drinks.

At irregular intervals they pre- sented him with a dirty slip of paper which they said was the bill, but he had the impression that they always undercharged him.

It would have made no difference if it had been the other way about.

He had always plenty of money nowadays.

He even had a job, a sinecure, more highly-paid than his old job had been.

The music from the telescreen stopped and a voice took over.

Winston raised his head to listen.

No bulletins from the front, however.

It was merely a brief announcement from the Ministry of Plenty.

In the preceding quarter, it appeared, the Tenth Three- Year Plan's quota for bootlaces had been overfulfilled by 98 per cent.

He examined the chess problem and set out the pieces.

It was a tricky ending, involving a couple of knights.

'White to play and mate in two moves.' Winston looked up at the portrait of Big Brother.

White always mates, he thought with a sort of cloudy mysticism.

Always, without exception, it is so arranged.

In no chess problem since the beginning of the world has black ever won.

Did it not symbolize the eternal, unvarying triumph of Good over Evil?

The huge face gazed back at him, full of calm power.

White always mates.

The voice from the telescreen paused and added in a different and much graver tone: 'You are warned to stand by for an impor- tant announcement at fifteen-thirty.

Fifteen-thirty!

This is news of the highest importance.

Take care not to miss it.

Fifteen-thirty!' The tinkling music struck up again.

Winston's heart stirred.

That was the bulletin from the front; instinct told him that it was bad news that was coming.

All day, with little spurts of excitement, the thought of a smashing defeat in Africa had been in and out of his mind.

He seemed actually to see the Eurasian army swarming across the never-broken frontier and pouring down into the tip of Africa like a column of ants.

Why had it not been possible to outflank them in some way?

The outline of the West African coast stood out vividly in his mind.

He picked up the white knight and moved it across the board.

THERE was the proper spot.

Even while he saw the black horde racing southward he saw another force, mysteriously assembled, suddenly planted in their rear, cutting their communications by land and sea.

He felt that by willing it he was bringing that other force into existence.

But it was necessary to act quickly.

If they could get control of the whole of Africa, if they had airfields and submarine bases at the Cape, it would cut Oceania in two.

It might mean anything: defeat, breakdown, the redivision of the world, the destruction of the Party!

He drew a deep breath.

An extraordinary medley of feeling- but it was not a medley, exactly; rather it was successive layers of feeling, in which one could not say which layer was undermost- struggled inside him.

The spasm passed.

He put the white knight back in its place, but for the moment he could not settle down to serious study of the chess problem.

His thoughts wandered again.

Almost uncon- sciously he traced with his finger in the dust on the table: 2+2=5 'They can't get inside you,' she had said.

But they could get inside you.

'What happens to you here is FOR EVER,' O'Brien had said.

That was a true word.

There were things, your own acts, from which you could never recover.

Something was killed in your breast: burnt out, cauterized out.

He had seen her; he had even spoken to her.

There was no danger in it.

He knew as though instinctively that they now took almost no interest in his doings.

He could have arranged to meet her a second time if either of them had wanted to.

Actually it was by chance that they had met.

It was in the Park, on a vile, biting day in March, when the earth was like iron and all the grass seemed dead and there was not a bud anywhere except a few cro- cuses which had pushed themselves up to be dismembered by the wind.

He was hurrying along with frozen hands and watering eyes when he saw her not ten metres away from him.

It struck him at once that she had changed in some ill-defined way.

They almost passed one another without a sign, then he turned and followed her, not very eagerly.

He knew that there was no danger, nobody would take any interest in him.

She did not speak.

She walked obliquely away across the grass as though trying to get rid of him, then seemed to resign herself to having him at her side.

Presently they were in among a clump of ragged leafless shrubs, useless either for concealment or as protection from the wind.

They halted.

It was vilely cold.

The wind whistled through the twigs and fretted the occasional, dirty-looking crocuses.

He put his arm round her waist.

There was no telescreen, but there must be hidden micro- phones: besides, they could be seen.

It did not matter, nothing mattered.

They could have lain down on the ground and done THAT if they had wanted to.

His flesh froze with horror at the thought of it.

She made no response whatever to the clasp of his arm; she did not even try to disengage herself.

He knew now what had changed in her.

Her face was sallower, and there was a long scar, partly hidden by the hair, across her forehead and temple; but that was not the change.

It was that her waist had grown thicker, and, in a surprising way, had stiffened.

He remembered how once, after the explosion of a rocket bomb, he had helped to drag a corpse out of some ruins, and had been astonished not only by the incredible weight of the thing, but by its rigidity and awk- wardness to handle, which made it seem more like stone than flesh.

Her body felt like that.

It occurred to him that the texture of her skin would be quite different from what it had once been.

He did not attempt to kiss her, nor did they speak.

As they walked back across the grass, she looked directly at him for the first time.

It was only a momentary glance, full of contempt and dislike.

He wondered whether it was a dislike that came purely out of the past or whether it was inspired also by his bloated face and the water that the wind kept squeezing from his eyes.

They sat down on two iron chairs, side by side but not too close together.

He saw that she was about to speak.

She moved her clumsy shoe a few centimetres and deliberately crushed a twig.

Her feet seemed to have grown broader, he noticed.

'I betrayed you,' she said baldly.

'I betrayed you,' he said.

She gave him another quick look of dislike.

'Sometimes,' she said, 'they threaten you with something some- thing you can't stand up to, can't even think about.

And then you say, "Don't do it to me, do it to somebody else, do it to so-and- so."

And perhaps you might pretend, afterwards, that it was only a trick and that you just said it to make them stop and didn't really mean it.

But that isn't true.

At the time when it happens you do mean it.

You think there's no other way of saving yourself, and you're quite ready to save yourself that way.

You WANT it to happen to the other person.

You don't give a damn what they suffer.

All you care about is yourself.' 'All you care about is yourself,' he echoed.

'And after that, you don't feel the same towards the other person any longer.' 'No,' he said, 'you don't feel the same.' There did not seem to be anything more to say.

The wind plas- tered their thin overalls against their bodies.

Almost at once it became embarrassing to sit there in silence: besides, it was too cold to keep still.

She said something about catching her Tube and stood up to go.

'We must meet again,' he said.

'Yes,' she said, 'we must meet again.' He followed irresolutely for a little distance, half a pace behind her.

They did not speak again.

She did not actually try to shake him off, but walked at just such a speed as to prevent his keeping abreast of her.

He had made up his mind that he would accom- pany her as far as the Tube station, but suddenly this process of trailing along in the cold seemed pointless and unbearable.

He was overwhelmed by a desire not so much to get away from Julia as to get back to the Chestnut Tree Cafe, which had never seemed so attractive as at this moment.

He had a nostalgic vision of his corner table, with the newspaper and the chessboard and the ever- flowing gin.

Above all, it would be warm in there.

The next moment, not altogether by accident, he allowed himself to become separated from her by a small knot of people.

He made a half- hearted attempt to catch up, then slowed down, turned, and made off in the opposite direction.

When he had gone fifty metres he looked back.

The street was not crowded, but already he could not distinguish her.

Any one of a dozen hurrying figures might have been hers.

Perhaps her thickened, stiffened body was no longer recognizable from behind.

'At the time when it happens,' she had said, 'you do mean it.' He had meant it.

He had not merely said it, he had wished it.

He had wished that she and not he should be delivered over to the-- Something changed in the music that trickled from the tele- screen.

A cracked and jeering note, a yellow note, came into it.

And then- perhaps it was not happening, perhaps it was only a memory taking on the semblance of sound- a voice was singing: 'Under the spreading chestnut tree I sold you and you sold me--' The tears welled up in his eyes.

A passing waiter noticed that his glass was empty and came back with the gin bottle.

He took up his glass and sniffed at it.

The stuff grew not less but more horrible with every mouthful he drank.

But it had become the element he swam in.

It was his life, his death, and his resurrection.

It was gin that sank him into stupor every night, and gin that revived him every morning.

When he woke, seldom before eleven hundred, with gummed-up eyelids and fiery mouth and a back that seemed to be broken, it would have been impos- sible even to rise from the horizontal if it had not been for the bottle and teacup placed beside the bed overnight.

Through the midday hours he sat with glazed face, the bottle handy, listening to the telescreen.

From fifteen to closing-time he was a fixture in the Chestnut Tree.

No one cared what he did any longer, no whis- tle woke him, no telescreen admonished him.

Occasionally, perhaps twice a week, he went to a dusty, forgotten-looking office in the Ministry of Truth and did a little work, or what was called work.

He had been appointed to a sub-committee of a sub-com- mittee which had sprouted from one of the innumerable committees dealing with minor difficulties that arose in the com- pilation of the Eleventh Edition of the Newspeak Dictionary.

They were engaged in producing something called an Interim Report, but what it was that they were reporting on he had never defi- nitely found out.

It was something to do with the question of whether commas should be placed inside brackets, or outside.

There were four others on the committee, all of them persons sim- ilar to himself.

There were days when they assembled and then promptly dispersed again, frankly admitting to one another that there was not really anything to be done.

But there were other days when they settled down to their work almost eagerly, making a tremendous show of entering up their minutes and drafting long memoranda which were never finished- when the argument as to what they were supposedly arguing about grew extraordinarily involved and abstruse, with subtle haggling over definitions, enor- mous digressions, quarrels- threats, even, to appeal to higher authority.

And then suddenly the life would go out of them and they would sit round the table looking at one another with extinct eyes, like ghosts fading at cock-crow.

The telescreen was silent for a moment.

Winston raised his head again.

The bulletin!

But no, they were merely changing the music.

He had the map of Africa behind his eyelids.

The move- ment of the armies was a diagram: a black arrow tearing vertically southward, and a white arrow horizontally eastward, across the tail of the first.

As though for reassurance he looked up at the imperturbable face in the portrait.

Was it conceivable that the second arrow did not even exist?

His interest flagged again.

He drank another mouthful of gin, picked up the white knight and made a tentative move.

Check.

But it was evidently not the right move, because-- Uncalled, a memory floated into his mind.

He saw a candle-lit room with a vast white-counterpaned bed, and himself, a boy of nine or ten, sitting on the floor, shaking a dice-box, and laughing excitedly.

His mother was sitting opposite him and also laughing.

It must have been about a month before she disappeared.

It was a moment of reconciliation, when the nagging hunger in his belly was forgotten and his earlier affection for her had temporarily revived.

He remembered the day well, a pelting, drenching day when the water streamed down the window-pane and the light indoors was too dull to read by.

The boredom of the two children in the dark, cramped bedroom became unbearable.

Winston whined and grizzled, made futile demands for food, fretted about the room pulling everything out of place and kicking the wain- scoting until the neighbours banged on the wall, while the younger child wailed intermittently.

In the end his mother said, 'Now be good, and I'll buy you a toy.

A lovely toy- you'll love it'; and then she had gone out in the rain, to a little general shop which was still sporadically open nearby, and came back with a cardboard box containing an outfit of Snakes and Ladders.

He could still remember the smell of the damp cardboard.

It was a miserable outfit.

The board was cracked and the tiny wooden dice were so ill-cut that they would hardly lie on their sides.

Winston looked at the thing sulkily and without interest.

But then his mother lit a piece of candle and they sat down on the floor to play.

Soon he was wildly excited and shouting with laughter as the tiddly-winks climbed hopefully up the ladders and then came slithering down the snakes again, almost to the starting-point.

They played eight games, winning four each.

His tiny sister, too young to understand what the game was about, had sat propped up against a bolster, laughing because the others were laughing.

For a whole afternoon they had all been happy together, as in his earlier childhood.

He pushed the picture out of his mind.

It was a false memory.

He was troubled by false memories occasionally.

They did not matter so long as one knew them for what they were.

Some things had happened, others had not happened.

He turned back to the chessboard and picked up the white knight again.

Almost in the same instant it dropped on to the board with a clatter.

He had started as though a pin had run into him.

A shrill trumpet-call had pierced the air.

It was the bulletin!

Victory!

It always meant victory when a trumpet-call preceded the news.

A sort of electric drill ran through the cafe.

Even the wait- ers had started and pricked up their ears.

The trumpet-call had let loose an enormous volume of noise.

Already an excited voice was gabbling from the telescreen, but even as it started it was almost drowned by a roar of cheering from outside.

The news had run round the streets like magic.

He could hear just enough of what was issuing from the telescreen to realize that it had all happened, as he had foreseen; a vast seaborne armada had secretly assembled a sudden blow in the enemy's rear, the white arrow tearing across the tail of the black.

Fragments of triumphant phrases pushed themselves through the din: 'Vast strategic manoeuvre- perfect co-ordination- utter rout- half a million prisoners- complete demoralization- con- trol of the whole of Africa- bring the war within measurable distance of its end- victory- greatest victory in human history- victory, victory, victory!' Under the table Winston's feet made convulsive movements.

He had not stirred from his seat, but in his mind he was running, swiftly running, he was with the crowds outside, cheering himself deaf.

He looked up again at the portrait of Big Brother.

The colos- sus that bestrode the world!

The rock against which the hordes of Asia dashed themselves in vain!

He thought how ten minutes ago- yes, only ten minutes- there had still been equivocation in his heart as he wondered whether the news from the front would be of victory or defeat.

Ah, it was more than a Eurasian army that had perished!

Much had changed in him since that first day in the Ministry of Love, but the final, indispensable, healing change had never happened, until this moment.

The voice from the telescreen was still pouring forth its tale of prisoners and booty and slaughter, but the shouting outside had died down a little.

The waiters were turning back to their work.

One of them approached with the gin bottle.

Winston, sitting in a blissful dream, paid no attention as his glass was filled up.

He was not running or cheering any longer.

He was back in the Ministry of Love, with everything forgiven, his soul white as snow.

He was in the public dock, confessing everything, implicating everybody.

He was walking down the white-tiled corridor, with the feeling of walking in sunlight, and an armed guard at his back.

The long- hoped-for bullet was entering his brain.

He gazed up at the enormous face.

Forty years it had taken him to learn what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark mous- tache.

O cruel, needless misunderstanding!

O stubborn, self-willed exile from the loving breast!

Two gin-scented tears trickled down the sides of his nose.

But it was all right, everything was all right, the struggle was finished.

He had won the victory over himself.

He loved Big Brother.

THE END APPENDIX.

The Principles of Newspeak Newspeak was the official language of Oceania and had been devised to meet the ideological needs of Ingsoc, or English Socialism.

In the year 1984 there was not as yet anyone who used Newspeak as his sole means of communication, either in speech or writing.

The leading articles in 'The Times' were written in it, but this was a TOUR DE FORCE which could only be carried out by a specialist.

It was expected that Newspeak would have finally superseded Oldspeak (or Standard English, as we should call it) by about the year 2050.

Meanwhile it gained ground steadily, all Party members tending to use Newspeak words and grammatical constructions more and more in their everyday speech.

The ver- sion in use in 1984, and embodied in the Ninth and Tenth Editions of the Newspeak Dictionary, was a provisional one, and contained many superfluous words and archaic formations which were due to be suppressed later.

It is with the final, perfected ver- sion, as embodied in the Eleventh Edition of the Dictionary, that we are concerned here.

The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expression for the world-view and mental habits proper to the devotees of Ingsoc, but to make all other modes of thought impos- sible.

It was intended that when Newspeak had been adopted once and for all and Oldspeak forgotten, a heretical thought- that is, a thought diverging from the principles of Ingsoc- should be literally unthinkable, at least so far as thought is dependent on words.

Its vocabulary was so constructed as to give exact and often very subtle expression to every meaning that a Party member could properly wish to express, while excluding all other meanings and also the possibility of arriving at them by indirect methods.

This was done partly by the invention of new words, but chiefly by eliminating undesirable words and by stripping such words as remained of unorthodox meanings, and so far as possi- ble of all secondary meanings whatever.

To give a single example.

The word FREE still existed in Newspeak, but it could only be used in such statements as 'This dog is free from lice' or 'This field is free from weeds'.

It could not be used in its old sense of 'politi- cally free' or 'intellectually free' since political and intellectual freedom no longer existed even as concepts, and were therefore of necessity nameless.

Quite apart from the suppression of definitely heretical words, reduction of vocabulary was regarded as an end in itself, and no word that could be dispensed with was allowed to survive.

Newspeak was designed not to extend but to DIMINISH the range of thought, and this purpose was indirectly assisted by cutting the choice of words down to a minimum.

Newspeak was founded on the English language as we now know it, though many Newspeak sentences, even when not con- taining newly-created words, would be barely intelligible to an English-speaker of our own day.

Newspeak words were divided into three distinct classes, known as the A vocabulary, the B vocabulary (also called compound words), and the C vocabulary.

It will be simpler to discuss each class separately, but the gram- matical peculiarities of the language can be dealt with in the section devoted to the A vocabulary, since the same rules held good for all three categories.

THE A VOCABULARY.

The A vocabulary consisted of the words needed for the business of everyday life- for such things as eating, drinking, working, putting on one's clothes, going up and down stairs, riding in vehicles, gardening, cooking, and the like.

It was composed almost entirely of words that we already possess words like HIT, RUN, DOG, TREE, SUGAR, HOUSE, FIELD- but in comparison with the present-day English vocabulary their number was extremely small, while their meanings were far more rigidly defined.

All ambiguities and shades of meaning had been purged out of them.

So far as it could be achieved, a Newspeak word of this class was simply a staccato sound expressing ONE clearly understood concept.

It would have been quite impossible to use the A vocabulary for literary purposes or for political or philosophical discussion.

It was intended only to express simple, purposive thoughts, usually involving concrete objects or physical actions.

The grammar of Newspeak had two outstanding peculiarities.

The first of these was an almost complete interchangeability between different parts of speech.

Any word in the language (in principle this applied even to very abstract words such as IF or WHEN) could be used either as verb, noun, adjective, or adverb.

Between the verb and the noun form, when they were of the same root, there was never any variation, this rule of itself involving the destruction of many archaic forms.

The word THOUGHT, for example, did not exist in Newspeak.

Its place was taken by THINK, which did duty for both noun and verb.

No etymologi- cal principle was followed here: in some cases it was the original noun that was chosen for retention, in other cases the verb.

Even where a noun and verb of kindred meaning were not etymologi- cally connected, one or other of them was frequently suppressed.

There was, for example, no such word as CUT, its meaning being sufficiently covered by the noun-verb KNIFE.

Adjectives were formed by adding the suffix -FUL to the noun-verb, and adverbs by adding -WISE.

Thus for example, SPEEDFUL meant 'rapid' and SPEEDWISE meant 'quickly'.

Certain of our present-day adjectives, such as GOOD, STRONG, BIG, BLACK, SOFT, were retained, but their total number was very small.

There was little need for them, since almost any adjectival meaning could be arrived at by adding -FUL to a noun-verb.

None of the now-exist- ing adverbs was retained, except for a very few already ending in -WISE: the -WISE termination was invariable.

The word WELL, for example, was replaced by GOODWISE.

In addition, any word- this again applied in principle to every word in the language- could be negatived by adding the affix UN-, or could be strengthened by the affix PLUS-, or, for still greater emphasis, DOUBLEPLUS-.

Thus, for example, UNCOLD meant 'warm', while PLUSCOLD and DOUBLEPLUSCOLD meant, respectively, 'very cold' and 'superlatively cold'.

It was also possible, as in present-day English, to modify the meaning of almost any word by prepositional affixes such as ANTE-, POST-, UP-, DOWN-, etc.

By such methods it was found possible to bring about an enormous diminution of vocabulary.

Given, for instance, the word GOOD, there was no need for such a word as BAD, since the required meaning was equally well- indeed, better- expressed by UNGOOD.

All that was necessary, in any case where two words formed a natural pair of opposites, was to decide which of them to suppress.

DARK, for example, could be replaced by UNLIGHT, or LIGHT by UNDARK, according to preference.

The second distinguishing mark of Newspeak grammar was its regularity.

Subject to a few exceptions which are mentioned below all inflexions followed the same rules.

Thus, in all verbs the preterite and the past participle were the same and ended in -ED.

The preterite of STEAL was STEALED, the preterite of THINK was THINKED, and so on throughout the language, all such forms as SWAM, GAVE, BROUGHT, SPOKE, TAKEN, etc., being abolished.

All plurals were made by adding -S or -ES as the case might be.

The plurals OF MAN, OX, LIFE, were MANS, OXES, LIFES.

Comparison of adjectives was invariably made by adding -ER, -EST (GOOD, GOODER, GOODEST), irregular forms and the MORE, MOST formation being suppressed.

The only classes of words that were still allowed to inflect irreg- ularly were the pronouns, the relatives, the demonstrative adjectives, and the auxiliary verbs.

All of these followed their ancient usage, except that WHOM had been scrapped as unnec- essary, and the SHALL, SHOULD tenses had been dropped, all their uses being covered by WILL and WOULD.

There were also certain irregularities in word-formation arising out of the need for rapid and easy speech.

A word which was difficult to utter, or was liable to be incorrectly heard, was held to be ipso facto a bad word; occasionally therefore, for the sake of euphony, extra letters were inserted into a word or an archaic formation was retained.

But this need made itself felt chiefly in connexion with the B vocabulary.

WHY so great an importance was attached to ease of pronunciation will be made clear later in this essay.

THE B VOCABULARY.

The B vocabulary consisted of words which had been deliberately constructed for political purposes: words, that is to say, which not only had in every case a political implication, but were intended to impose a desirable mental atti- tude upon the person using them.

Without a full understanding of the principles of Ingsoc it was difficult to use these words cor- rectly.

In some cases they could be translated into Oldspeak, or even into words taken from the A vocabulary, but this usually demanded a long paraphrase and always involved the loss of cer- tain overtones.

The B words were a sort of verbal shorthand, often packing whole ranges of ideas into a few syllables, and at the same time more accurate and forcible than ordinary language.

The B words were in all cases compound words.

[Compound words such as SPEAKWRITE, were of course to be found in the A vocabulary, but these were merely convenient abbreviations and had no special ideological colour.] They consisted of two or more words, or portions of words, welded together in an easily pro- nounceable form.

The resulting amalgam was always a noun-verb, and inflected according to the ordinary rules.

To take a single example: the word GOODTHINK, meaning, very roughly, 'orthodoxy', or, if one chose to regard it as a verb, 'to think in an orthodox manner'.

This inflected as follows: noun- verb, GOODTHINK; past tense and past participle, GOODTHINKED; present participle, GOOD-THINKING; adjective, GOODTHINKFUL; adverb, GOODTHINKWISE; verbal noun, GOODTHINKER.

The B words were not constructed on any etymological plan.

The words of which they were made up could be any parts of speech, and could be placed in any order and mutilated in any way which made them easy to pronounce while indicating their derivation.

In the word CRIMETHINK (thoughtcrime), for instance, the THINK came second, whereas in THINKPOL (Thought Police) it came first, and in the latter word POLICE had lost its second syllable.

Because of the great difficulty in securing euphony, irregular formations were commoner in the B vocabu- lary than in the A vocabulary.

For example, the adjective forms of MINITRUE, MINIPAX, and MINILUV were, respectively, MINI- TRUTHFUL, MINIPEACEFUL, and MINILOVELY, simply because -TRUEFUL, -PAXFUL, and -LOVEFUL were slightly awkward to pronounce.

In principle, however, all B words could inflect, and all inflected in exactly the same way.

Some of the B words had highly subtilized meanings, barely intelligible to anyone who had not mastered the language as a whole.

Consider, for example, such a typical sentence from a 'Times' leading article as OLDTHINKERS UNBELLYFEEL INGSOC.

The shortest rendering that one could make of this in Oldspeak would be: 'Those whose ideas were formed before the Revolution cannot have a full emotional understanding of the principles of English Socialism.' But this is not an adequate trans- lation.

To begin with, in order to grasp the full meaning of the Newspeak sentence quoted above, one would have to have a clear idea of what is meant by INGSOC.

And in addition, only a person thoroughly grounded in Ingsoc could appreciate the full force of the word BELLYFEEL, which implied a blind, enthusiastic accept- ance difficult to imagine today; or of the word OLDTHINK, which was inextricably mixed up with the idea of wickedness and decadence.

But the special function of certain Newspeak words, of which OLDTHINK was one, was not so much to express mean- ings as to destroy them.

These words, necessarily few in number, had had their meanings extended until they contained within themselves whole batteries of words which, as they were suffi- ciently covered by a single comprehensive term, could now be scrapped and forgotten.

The greatest difficulty facing the compil- ers of the Newspeak Dictionary was not to invent new words, but, having invented them, to make sure what they meant: to make sure, that is to say, what ranges of words they cancelled by their existence.

As we have already seen in the case of the word FREE, words which had once borne a heretical meaning were sometimes retained for the sake of convenience, but only with the undesir- able meanings purged out of them.

Countless other words such as HONOUR, JUSTICE, MORALITY, INTERNATIONALISM, DEMOCRACY, SCIENCE, and RELIGION had simply ceased to exist.

A few blanket words covered them, and, in covering them, abolished them.

All words grouping themselves round the con- cepts of liberty and equality, for instance, were contained in the single word CRIMETHINK, while all words grouping themselves round the concepts of objectivity and rationalism were contained in the single word OLDTHINK.

Greater precision would have been dangerous.

What was required in a Party member was an outlook similar to that of the ancient Hebrew who knew, without knowing much else, that all nations other than his own wor- shipped 'false gods'.

He did not need to know that these gods were called Baal, Osiris, Moloch, Ashtaroth, and the like: proba- bly the less he knew about them the better for his orthodoxy.

He knew Jehovah and the commandments of Jehovah: he knew, therefore, that all gods with other names or other attributes were false gods.

In somewhat the same way, the party member knew what constituted right conduct, and in exceedingly vague, gener- alized terms he knew what kinds of departure from it were possible.

His sexual life, for example, was entirely regulated by the two Newspeak words SEXCRIME (sexual immorality) and GOODSEX (chastity).

SEXCRIME covered all sexual misdeeds whatever.

It covered fornication, adultery, homosexuality, and other perversions, and, in addition, normal intercourse practised for its own sake.

There was no need to enumerate them separately, since they were all equally culpable, and, in principle, all punish- able by death.

In the C vocabulary, which consisted of scientific and technical words, it might be necessary to give specialized names to certain sexual aberrations, but the ordinary citizen had no need of them.

He knew what was meant by GOODSEX- that is to say, normal intercourse between man and wife, for the sole purpose of begetting children, and without physical pleasure on the part of the woman: all else was SEXCRIME.

In Newspeak it was seldom possible to follow a heretical thought further than the perception that it WAS heretical: beyond that point the necessary words were nonexistent.

No word in the B vocabulary was ideologically neutral.

A great many were euphemisms.

Such words, for instance, as JOYCAMP (forced-labour camp) or MINIPAX (Ministry of Peace, i.e.

Ministry of War) meant almost the exact opposite of what they appeared to mean.

Some words, on the other hand, displayed a frank and contemptuous understanding of the real nature of Oceanic society.

An example was PROLEFEED, meaning the rub- bishy entertainment and spurious news which the Party handed out to the masses.

Other words, again, were ambivalent, having the connotation 'good' when applied to the Party and 'bad' when applied to its enemies.

But in addition there were great numbers of words which at first sight appeared to be mere abbreviations and which derived their ideological colour not from their meaning, but from their structure.

So far as it could be contrived, everything that had or might have political significance of any kind was fitted into the B vocab- ulary.

The name of every organization, or body of people, or doctrine, or country, or institution, or public building, was invari- ably cut down into the familiar shape; that is, a single easily pronounced word with the smallest number of syllables that would preserve the original derivation.

In the Ministry of Truth, for example, the Records Department, in which Winston Smith worked, was called RECDEP, the Fiction Department was called FICDEP, the Teleprogrammes Department was called TELEDEP, and so on.

This was not done solely with the object of saving time.

Even in the early decades of the twentieth century, telescoped words and phrases had been one of the characteristic features of political language; and it had been noticed that the tendency to use abbreviations of this kind was most marked in totalitarian countries and totalitarian organizations.

Examples were such words as NAZI, GESTAPO, COMINTERN, INPRECORR, AGITPROP.

In the beginning the practice had been adopted as it were instinctively, but in Newspeak it was used with a conscious purpose.

It was perceived that in thus abbreviating a name one narrowed and subtly altered its meaning, by cutting out most of the associations that would otherwise cling to it.

The words COMMUNIST INTERNATIONAL, for instance, call up a com- posite picture of universal human brotherhood, red flags, barricades, Karl Marx, and the Paris Commune.

The word COM- INTERN, on the other hand, suggests merely a tightly-knit organization and a well-defined body of doctrine.

It refers to something almost as easily recognized, and as limited in purpose, as a chair or a table.

COMINTERN is a word that can be uttered almost without taking thought, whereas COMMUNIST INTER- NATIONAL is a phrase over which one is obliged to linger at least momentarily.

In the same way, the associations called up by a word like MINITRUE are fewer and more controllable than those called up by MINISTRY OF TRUTH.

This accounted not only for the habit of abbreviating whenever possible, but also for the almost exaggerated care that was taken to make every word easily pronounceable.

In Newspeak, euphony outweighed every consideration other than exactitude of meaning.

Regularity of grammar was always sacrificed to it when it seemed necessary.

And rightly so, since what was required, above all for political purposes, was short clipped words of unmistakable meaning which could be uttered rapidly and which roused the minimum of echoes in the speaker's mind.

The words of the B vocabulary even gained in force from the fact that nearly all of them were very much alike.

Almost invariably these words- GOODTHINK, MINIPAX, PROLE- FEED, SEXCRIME, JOYCAMP, INGSOC, BELLYFEEL, THINKPOL, and countless others- were words of two or three syllables, with the stress distributed equally between the first syl- lable and the last.

The use of them encouraged a gabbling style of speech, at once staccato and monotonous.

And this was exactly what was aimed at.

The intention was to make speech, and espe- cially speech on any subject not ideologically neutral, as nearly as possible independent of consciousness.

For the purposes of every- day life it was no doubt necessary, or sometimes necessary, to reflect before speaking, but a Party member called upon to make a political or ethical judgement should be able to spray forth the correct opinions as automatically as a machine gun spraying forth bullets.

His training fitted him to do this, the language gave him an almost foolproof instrument, and the texture of the words, with their harsh sound and a certain wilful ugliness which was in accord with the spirit of Ingsoc, assisted the process still further.

So did the fact of having very few words to choose from.

Relative to our own, the Newspeak vocabulary was tiny, and new ways of reducing it were constantly being devised.

Newspeak, indeed, differed from most all other languages in that its vocabu- lary grew smaller instead of larger every year.

Each reduction was a gain, since the smaller the area of choice, the smaller the temp- tation to take thought.

Ultimately it was hoped to make articulate speech issue from the larynx without involving the higher brain centres at all.

This aim was frankly admitted in the Newspeak word DUCKSPEAK, meaning 'to quack like a duck'.

Like various other words in the B vocabulary, DUCKSPEAK was ambivalent in meaning.

Provided that the opinions which were quacked out were orthodox ones, it implied nothing but praise, and when 'The Times' referred to one of the orators of the Party as a DOUBLE- PLUSGOOD DUCKSPEAKER it was paying a warm and valued compliment.

THE C VOCABULARY.

The C vocabulary was supplementary to the others and consisted entirely of scientific and technical terms.

These resembled the scientific terms in use today, and were con- structed from the same roots, but the usual care was taken to define them rigidly and strip them of undesirable meanings.

They followed the same grammatical rules as the words in the other two vocabularies.

Very few of the C words had any currency either in everyday speech or in political speech.

Any scientific worker or technician could find all the words he needed in the list devoted to his own speciality, but he seldom had more than a smattering of the words occurring in the other lists.

Only a very few words were common to all lists, and there was no vocabulary expressing the function of Science as a habit of mind, or a method of thought, irrespective of its particular branches.

There was, indeed, no word for 'Science', any meaning that it could possibly bear being already sufficiently covered by the word INGSOC.

From the foregoing account it will be seen that in Newspeak the expression of unorthodox opinions, above a very low level, was well-nigh impossible.

It was of course possible to utter here- sies of a very crude kind, a species of blasphemy.

It would have been possible, for example, to say BIG BROTHER IS UNGOOD.

But this statement, which to an orthodox ear merely conveyed a self-evident absurdity, could not have been sustained by reasoned argument, because the necessary words were not available.

Ideas inimical to Ingsoc could only be entertained in a vague wordless form, and could only be named in very broad terms which lumped together and condemned whole groups of heresies without defin- ing them in doing so.

One could, in fact, only use Newspeak for unorthodox purposes by illegitimately translating some of the words back into Oldspeak.

For example, ALL MANS ARE EQUAL was a possible Newspeak sentence, but only in the same sense in which ALL MEN ARE REDHAIRED is a possible Oldspeak sentence.

It did not contain a grammatical error, but it expressed a palpable untruth- i.e.

that all men are of equal size, weight, or strength.

The concept of political equality no longer existed, and this secondary meaning had accordingly been purged out of the word EQUAL.

In 1984, when Oldspeak was still the normal means of communication, the danger theoretically existed that in using Newspeak words one might remember their original meanings.

In practice it was not difficult for any person well grounded in DOUBLETHINK to avoid doing this, but within a couple of generations even the possibility of such a lapse would have vanished.

A person growing up with Newspeak as his sole language would no more know that EQUAL had once had the secondary meaning of 'politically equal', or that FREE had once meant 'intellectually free', than for instance, a person who had never heard of chess would be aware of the secondary meanings attaching to QUEEN and ROOK.

There would be many crimes and errors which it would be beyond his power to commit, simply because they were nameless and therefore unimaginable.

And it was to be foreseen that with the passage of time the distinguishing characteristics of Newspeak would become more and more pro- nounced- its words growing fewer and fewer, their meanings more and more rigid, and the chance of putting them to improper uses always diminishing.

When Oldspeak had been once and for all superseded, the last link with the past would have been severed.

History had already been rewritten, but fragments of the literature of the past survived here and there, imperfectly censored, and so long as one retained one's knowledge of Oldspeak it was possible to read them.

In the future such fragments, even if they chanced to survive, would be unintelligible and untranslatable.

It was impossible to translate any passage of Oldspeak into Newspeak unless it either referred to some technical process or some very simple everyday action, or was already orthodox (GOODTHINKFUL would be the Newspeak expression) in tendency.

In practice this meant that no book written before approximately 1960 could be translated as a whole.

Pre-revolutionary literature could only be subjected to ide- ological translation- that is, alteration in sense as well as language.

Take for example the well-known passage from the Declaration of Independence: WE HOLD THESE TRUTHS TO BE SELF- EVIDENT,THAT ALL MEN ARE CREATED EQUAL, THAT THEY ARE ENDOWED BY THEIR CREATOR WITH CERTAIN INALIENABLE RIGHTS, THAT AMONG THESE ARE LIFE, LIBERTY, AND THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS.

THAT TO SECURE THESE RIGHTS, GOVERNMENTS ARE INSTITUTED AMONG MEN, DERIVING THEIR POWERS FROM THE CONSENT OF THE GOVERNED.

THAT WHENEVER ANY FORM OF GOVERNMENT BECOMES DESTRUCTIVE OF THOSE ENDS, IT IS THE RIGHT OF THE PEOPLE TO ALTER OR ABOLISH IT, AND TO INSTITUTE NEW GOVERNMENT...

It would have been quite impossible to render this into Newspeak while keeping to the sense of the original.

The nearest one could come to doing so would be to swallow the whole passage up in the single word CRIMETHINK.

A full translation could only be an ideological translation, whereby Jefferson's words would be changed into a panegyric on absolute government.

A good deal of the literature of the past was, indeed, already being transformed in this way.

Considerations of prestige made it desirable to preserve the memory of certain historical figures, while at the same time bringing their achievements into line with the philosophy of Ingsoc.

Various writers, such as Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, Byron, Dickens, and some others were therefore in process of translation: when the task had been completed, their original writings, with all else that survived of the literature of the past, would be destroyed.

These translations were a slow and dif- ficult business, and it was not expected that they would be finished before the first or second decade of the twenty-first cen- tury.

There were also large quantities of merely utilitarian literature- indispensable technical manuals, and the like- that had to be treated in the same way.

It was chiefly in order to allow time for the preliminary work of translation that the final adop- tion of Newspeak had been fixed for so late a date as 2050.

THE END

--- NEXT VOLUME ---

Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea JULES VERNE An Underwater Tour of the World Translated from the Original French by F.

P.

Walter ___________________________________________________________________ CEDAR POST PUBLISHING * HOUSTON, TEXAS Text Prepared by: F.

P.

Walter, 1433 Cedar Post, No.

31, Houston, Texas 77055.

(713) 827-1345 A complete, unabridged translation of Vingt milles lieues sous les mers by Jules Verne, based on the original French texts published in Paris by J.

Hetzel et Cie.

over the period 1869-71.

VERNE'S TITLE The French title of this novel is Vingt mille lieues sous les mers.

This is accurately translated as Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the SEAS--rather than the SEA, as with many English editions.

Verne's novel features a tour of the major oceans, and the term Leagues in its title is used as a measure not of depth but distance.

Ed.

Contents Introduction 4 Units of Measure 7 FIRST PART 1.

A Runaway Reef 2.

The Pros and Cons 3.

As Master Wishes 4.

Ned Land 5.

At Random!

6.

At Full Steam 7.

A Whale of Unknown Species 8.

"Mobilis in Mobili"

9.

The Tantrums of Ned Land 10.

The Man of the Waters 11.

The Nautilus 12.

Everything through Electricity 13.

Some Figures 14.

The Black Current 15.

An Invitation in Writing 16.

Strolling the Plains 17.

An Underwater Forest 18.

Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific 19.

Vanikoro 20.

The Torres Strait 21.

Some Days Ashore 22.

The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo 23.

"Aegri Somnia"

24.

The Coral Realm SECOND PART 1.

The Indian Ocean 2.

A New Proposition from Captain Nemo 3.

A Pearl Worth Ten Million 4.

The Red Sea 5.

Arabian Tunnel 6.

The Greek Islands 7.

The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours 8.

The Bay of Vigo 9.

A Lost Continent 10.

The Underwater Coalfields 11.

The Sargasso Sea 12.

Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales 13.

The Ice Bank 14.

The South Pole 15.

Accident or Incident?

16.

Shortage of Air 17.

From Cape Horn to the Amazon 18.

The Devilfish 19.

The Gulf Stream 20.

In Latitude 47?

24' and Longitude 17?

28' 21.

A Mass Execution 22.

The Last Words of Captain Nemo 23.

Conclusion Introduction "The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us,"

admits Professor Aronnax early in this novel.

"What goes on in those distant depths?

What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit, those regions twelve or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water?

It's almost beyond conjecture."

Jules Verne (1828-1905) published the French equivalents of these words in 1869, and little has changed since.

126 years later, a Time cover story on deep-sea exploration made much the same admission: "We know more about Mars than we know about the oceans."

This reality begins to explain the dark power and otherworldly fascination of Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas.

Born in the French river town of Nantes, Verne had a lifelong passion for the sea.

First as a Paris stockbroker, later as a celebrated author and yachtsman, he went on frequent voyages-- to Britain, America, the Mediterranean.

But the specific stimulus for this novel was an 1865 fan letter from a fellow writer, Madame George Sand.

She praised Verne's two early novels Five Weeks in a Balloon (1863) and Journey to the Center of the Earth (1864), then added: "Soon I hope you'll take us into the ocean depths, your characters traveling in diving equipment perfected by your science and your imagination."

Thus inspired, Verne created one of literature's great rebels, a freedom fighter who plunged beneath the waves to wage a unique form of guerilla warfare.

Initially, Verne's narrative was influenced by the 1863 uprising of Poland against Tsarist Russia.

The Poles were quashed with a violence that appalled not only Verne but all Europe.

As originally conceived, Verne's Captain Nemo was a Polish nobleman whose entire family had been slaughtered by Russian troops.

Nemo builds a fabulous futuristic submarine, the Nautilus, then conducts an underwater campaign of vengeance against his imperialist oppressor.

But in the 1860s France had to treat the Tsar as an ally, and Verne's publisher Pierre Hetzel pronounced the book unprintable.

Verne reworked its political content, devising new nationalities for Nemo and his great enemy--information revealed only in a later novel, The Mysterious Island (1875); in the present work Nemo's background remains a dark secret.

In all, the novel had a difficult gestation.

Verne and Hetzel were in constant conflict and the book went through multiple drafts, struggles reflected in its several working titles over the period 1865-69: early on, it was variously called Voyage Under the Waters, Twenty-five Thousand Leagues Under the Waters, Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Waters, and A Thousand Leagues Under the Oceans.

Verne is often dubbed, in Isaac Asimov's phrase, "the world's first science-fiction writer."

And it's true, many of his sixty-odd books do anticipate future events and technologies: From the Earth to the Moon (1865) and Hector Servadac (1877) deal in space travel, while Journey to the Center of the Earth features travel to the earth's core.

But with Verne the operative word is "travel,"

and some of his best-known titles don't really qualify as sci-fi: Around the World in Eighty Days (1872) and Michael Strogoff (1876) are closer to "travelogs"-- adventure yarns in far-away places.

These observations partly apply here.

The subtitle of the present book is An Underwater Tour of the World, so in good travelog style, the Nautilus's exploits supply an episodic story line.

Shark attacks, giant squid, cannibals, hurricanes, whale hunts, and other rip-roaring adventures erupt almost at random.

Yet this loose structure gives the novel an air of documentary realism.

What's more, Verne adds backbone to the action by developing three recurring motifs: the deepening mystery of Nemo's past life and future intentions, the mounting tension between Nemo and hot-tempered harpooner Ned Land, and Ned's ongoing schemes to escape from the Nautilus.

These unifying threads tighten the narrative and accelerate its momentum.

Other subtleties occur inside each episode, the textures sparkling with wit, information, and insight.

Verne regards the sea from many angles: in the domain of marine biology, he gives us thumbnail sketches of fish, seashells, coral, sometimes in great catalogs that swirl past like musical cascades; in the realm of geology, he studies volcanoes literally inside and out; in the world of commerce, he celebrates the high-energy entrepreneurs who lay the Atlantic Cable or dig the Suez Canal.

And Verne's marine engineering proves especially authoritative.

His specifications for an open-sea submarine and a self-contained diving suit were decades before their time, yet modern technology bears them out triumphantly.

True, today's scientists know a few things he didn't: the South Pole isn't at the water's edge but far inland; sharks don't flip over before attacking; giant squid sport ten tentacles not eight; sperm whales don't prey on their whalebone cousins.

This notwithstanding, Verne furnishes the most evocative portrayal of the ocean depths before the arrival of Jacques Cousteau and technicolor film.

Lastly the book has stature as a novel of character.

Even the supporting cast is shrewdly drawn: Professor Aronnax, the career scientist caught in an ethical conflict; Conseil, the compulsive classifier who supplies humorous tag lines for Verne's fast facts; the harpooner Ned Land, a creature of constant appetites, man as heroic animal.

But much of the novel's brooding power comes from Captain Nemo.

Inventor, musician, Renaissance genius, he's a trail-blazing creation, the prototype not only for countless renegade scientists in popular fiction, but even for such varied figures as Sherlock Holmes or Wolf Larsen.

However, Verne gives his hero's brilliance and benevolence a dark underside--the man's obsessive hate for his old enemy.

This compulsion leads Nemo into ugly contradictions: he's a fighter for freedom, yet all who board his ship are imprisoned there for good; he works to save lives, both human and animal, yet he himself creates a holocaust; he detests imperialism, yet he lays personal claim to the South Pole.

And in this last action he falls into the classic sin of Pride.

He's swiftly punished.

The Nautilus nearly perishes in the Antarctic and Nemo sinks into a growing depression.

Like Shakespeare's King Lear he courts death and madness in a great storm, then commits mass murder, collapses in catatonic paralysis, and suicidally runs his ship into the ocean's most dangerous whirlpool.

Hate swallows him whole.

For many, then, this book has been a source of fascination, surely one of the most influential novels ever written, an inspiration for such scientists and discoverers as engineer Simon Lake, oceanographer William Beebe, polar traveler Sir Ernest Shackleton.

Likewise Dr.

Robert D.

Ballard, finder of the sunken Titanic, confesses that this was his favorite book as a teenager, and Cousteau himself, most renowned of marine explorers, called it his shipboard bible.

The present translation is a faithful yet communicative rendering of the original French texts published in Paris by J.

Hetzel et Cie.-- collated with the softcover editions of the First and Second Parts issued separately in the autumn of 1869 and the summer of 1870.

Although prior English versions have often been heavily abridged, this new translation is complete to the smallest substantive detail.

Because, as that Time cover story suggests, we still haven't caught up with Verne.

Even in our era of satellite dishes and video games, the seas keep their secrets.

We've seen progress in sonar, torpedoes, and other belligerent machinery, but sailors and scientists-- to say nothing of tourists--have yet to voyage in a submarine with the luxury and efficiency of the Nautilus.

F.

P.

WALTER University of Houston Units of Measure CABLE LENGTH In Verne's context, 600 feet CENTIGRADE 0 degrees centigrade = freezing water 37 degrees centigrade = human body temperature 100 degrees centigrade = boiling water FATHOM 6 feet GRAM Roughly 1/28 of an ounce - MILLIGRAM Roughly 1/28,000 of an ounce - KILOGRAM (KILO) Roughly 2.2 pounds HECTARE Roughly 2.5 acres KNOT 1.15 miles per hour LEAGUE In Verne's context, 2.16 miles LITER Roughly 1 quart METER Roughly 1 yard, 3 inches - MILLIMETER Roughly 1/25 of an inch - CENTIMETER Roughly 2/5 of an inch - DECIMETER Roughly 4 inches - KILOMETER Roughly 6/10 of a mile - MYRIAMETER Roughly 6.2 miles TON, METRIC Roughly 2,200 pounds viii FIRST PART ___________________________________________________________________ A Runaway Reef THE YEAR 1866 was marked by a bizarre development, an unexplained and downright inexplicable phenomenon that surely no one has forgotten.

Without getting into those rumors that upset civilians in the seaports and deranged the public mind even far inland, it must be said that professional seamen were especially alarmed.

Traders, shipowners, captains of vessels, skippers, and master mariners from Europe and America, naval officers from every country, and at their heels the various national governments on these two continents, were all extremely disturbed by the business.

In essence, over a period of time several ships had encountered "an enormous thing"

at sea, a long spindle-shaped object, sometimes giving off a phosphorescent glow, infinitely bigger and faster than any whale.

The relevant data on this apparition, as recorded in various logbooks, agreed pretty closely as to the structure of the object or creature in question, its unprecedented speed of movement, its startling locomotive power, and the unique vitality with which it seemed to be gifted.

If it was a cetacean, it exceeded in bulk any whale previously classified by science.

No naturalist, neither Cuvier nor Lacpde, neither Professor Dumeril nor Professor de Quatrefages, would have accepted the existence of such a monster sight unseen-- specifically, unseen by their own scientific eyes.

Striking an average of observations taken at different times-- rejecting those timid estimates that gave the object a length of 200 feet, and ignoring those exaggerated views that saw it as a mile wide and three long--you could still assert that this phenomenal creature greatly exceeded the dimensions of anything then known to ichthyologists, if it existed at all.

Now then, it did exist, this was an undeniable fact; and since the human mind dotes on objects of wonder, you can understand the worldwide excitement caused by this unearthly apparition.

As for relegating it to the realm of fiction, that charge had to be dropped.

In essence, on July 20, 1866, the steamer Governor Higginson, from the Calcutta & Burnach Steam Navigation Co., encountered this moving mass five miles off the eastern shores of Australia.

Captain Baker at first thought he was in the presence of an unknown reef; he was even about to fix its exact position when two waterspouts shot out of this inexplicable object and sprang hissing into the air some 150 feet.

So, unless this reef was subject to the intermittent eruptions of a geyser, the Governor Higginson had fair and honest dealings with some aquatic mammal, until then unknown, that could spurt from its blowholes waterspouts mixed with air and steam.

Similar events were likewise observed in Pacific seas, on July 23 of the same year, by the Christopher Columbus from the West India & Pacific Steam Navigation Co.

Consequently, this extraordinary cetacean could transfer itself from one locality to another with startling swiftness, since within an interval of just three days, the Governor Higginson and the Christopher Columbus had observed it at two positions on the charts separated by a distance of more than 700 nautical leagues.

Fifteen days later and 2,000 leagues farther, the Helvetia from the Compagnie Nationale and the Shannon from the Royal Mail line, running on opposite tacks in that part of the Atlantic lying between the United States and Europe, respectively signaled each other that the monster had been sighted in latitude 42 degrees 15' north and longitude 60 degrees 35' west of the meridian of Greenwich.

From their simultaneous observations, they were able to estimate the mammal's minimum length at more than 350 English feet;* this was because both the Shannon and the Helvetia were of smaller dimensions, although each measured 100 meters stem to stern.

Now then, the biggest whales, those rorqual whales that frequent the waterways of the Aleutian Islands, have never exceeded a length of 56 meters--if they reach even that.

*Author's Note: About 106 meters.

An English foot is only 30.4 centimeters.

One after another, reports arrived that would profoundly affect public opinion: new observations taken by the transatlantic liner Pereire, the Inman line's Etna running afoul of the monster, an official report drawn up by officers on the French frigate Normandy, dead-earnest reckonings obtained by the general staff of Commodore Fitz-James aboard the Lord Clyde.

In lighthearted countries, people joked about this phenomenon, but such serious, practical countries as England, America, and Germany were deeply concerned.

In every big city the monster was the latest rage; they sang about it in the coffee houses, they ridiculed it in the newspapers, they dramatized it in the theaters.

The tabloids found it a fine opportunity for hatching all sorts of hoaxes.

In those newspapers short of copy, you saw the reappearance of every gigantic imaginary creature, from "Moby Dick,"

that dreadful white whale from the High Arctic regions, to the stupendous kraken whose tentacles could entwine a 500-ton craft and drag it into the ocean depths.

They even reprinted reports from ancient times: the views of Aristotle and Pliny accepting the existence of such monsters, then the Norwegian stories of Bishop Pontoppidan, the narratives of Paul Egede, and finally the reports of Captain Harrington-- whose good faith is above suspicion--in which he claims he saw, while aboard the Castilian in 1857, one of those enormous serpents that, until then, had frequented only the seas of France's old extremist newspaper, The Constitutionalist.

An interminable debate then broke out between believers and skeptics in the scholarly societies and scientific journals.

The "monster question"

inflamed all minds.

During this memorable campaign, journalists making a profession of science battled with those making a profession of wit, spilling waves of ink and some of them even two or three drops of blood, since they went from sea serpents to the most offensive personal remarks.

For six months the war seesawed.

With inexhaustible zest, the popular press took potshots at feature articles from the Geographic Institute of Brazil, the Royal Academy of Science in Berlin, the British Association, the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., at discussions in The Indian Archipelago, and at scientific chronicles in the great French and foreign newspapers.

When the monster's detractors cited a saying by the botanist Linnaeus that "nature doesn't make leaps,"

witty writers in the popular periodicals parodied it, maintaining in essence that "nature doesn't make lunatics,"

and ordering their contemporaries never to give the lie to nature by believing in krakens, sea serpents, "Moby Dicks,"

and other all-out efforts from drunken seamen.

Finally, in a much-feared satirical journal, an article by its most popular columnist finished off the monster for good, spurning it in the style of Hippolytus repulsing the amorous advances of his stepmother Phaedra, and giving the creature its quietus amid a universal burst of laughter.

Wit had defeated science.

*German: "Bulletin."

Ed.

During the first months of the year 1867, the question seemed to be buried, and it didn't seem due for resurrection, when new facts were brought to the public's attention.

But now it was no longer an issue of a scientific problem to be solved, but a quite real and serious danger to be avoided.

The question took an entirely new turn.

The monster again became an islet, rock, or reef, but a runaway reef, unfixed and elusive.

On March 5, 1867, the Moravian from the Montreal Ocean Co., lying during the night in latitude 27 degrees 30' and longitude 72 degrees 15', ran its starboard quarter afoul of a rock marked on no charts of these waterways.

Under the combined efforts of wind and 400-horsepower steam, it was traveling at a speed of thirteen knots.

Without the high quality of its hull, the Moravian would surely have split open from this collision and gone down together with those 237 passengers it was bringing back from Canada.

This accident happened around five o'clock in the morning, just as day was beginning to break.

The officers on watch rushed to the craft's stern.

They examined the ocean with the most scrupulous care.

They saw nothing except a strong eddy breaking three cable lengths out, as if those sheets of water had been violently churned.

The site's exact bearings were taken, and the Moravian continued on course apparently undamaged.

Had it run afoul of an underwater rock or the wreckage of some enormous derelict ship?

They were unable to say.

But when they examined its undersides in the service yard, they discovered that part of its keel had been smashed.

This occurrence, extremely serious in itself, might perhaps have been forgotten like so many others, if three weeks later it hadn't been reenacted under identical conditions.

Only, thanks to the nationality of the ship victimized by this new ramming, and thanks to the reputation of the company to which this ship belonged, the event caused an immense uproar.

No one is unaware of the name of that famous English shipowner, Cunard.

In 1840 this shrewd industrialist founded a postal service between Liverpool and Halifax, featuring three wooden ships with 400-horsepower paddle wheels and a burden of 1,162 metric tons.

Eight years later, the company's assets were increased by four 650-horsepower ships at 1,820 metric tons, and in two more years, by two other vessels of still greater power and tonnage.

In 1853 the Cunard Co., whose mail-carrying charter had just been renewed, successively added to its assets the Arabia, the Persia, the China, the Scotia, the Java, and the Russia, all ships of top speed and, after the Great Eastern, the biggest ever to plow the seas.

So in 1867 this company owned twelve ships, eight with paddle wheels and four with propellers.

If I give these highly condensed details, it is so everyone can fully understand the importance of this maritime transportation company, known the world over for its shrewd management.

No transoceanic navigational undertaking has been conducted with more ability, no business dealings have been crowned with greater success.

In twenty-six years Cunard ships have made 2,000 Atlantic crossings without so much as a voyage canceled, a delay recorded, a man, a craft, or even a letter lost.

Accordingly, despite strong competition from France, passengers still choose the Cunard line in preference to all others, as can be seen in a recent survey of official documents.

Given this, no one will be astonished at the uproar provoked by this accident involving one of its finest steamers.

On April 13, 1867, with a smooth sea and a moderate breeze, the Scotia lay in longitude 15 degrees 12' and latitude 45 degrees 37'.

It was traveling at a speed of 13.43 knots under the thrust of its 1,000-horsepower engines.

Its paddle wheels were churning the sea with perfect steadiness.

It was then drawing 6.7 meters of water and displacing 6,624 cubic meters.

At 4:17 in the afternoon, during a high tea for passengers gathered in the main lounge, a collision occurred, scarcely noticeable on the whole, affecting the Scotia's hull in that quarter a little astern of its port paddle wheel.

The Scotia hadn't run afoul of something, it had been fouled, and by a cutting or perforating instrument rather than a blunt one.

This encounter seemed so minor that nobody on board would have been disturbed by it, had it not been for the shouts of crewmen in the hold, who climbed on deck yelling: "We're sinking!

We're sinking!"

At first the passengers were quite frightened, but Captain Anderson hastened to reassure them.

In fact, there could be no immediate danger.

Divided into seven compartments by watertight bulkheads, the Scotia could brave any leak with impunity.

Captain Anderson immediately made his way into the hold.

He discovered that the fifth compartment had been invaded by the sea, and the speed of this invasion proved that the leak was considerable.

Fortunately this compartment didn't contain the boilers, because their furnaces would have been abruptly extinguished.

Captain Anderson called an immediate halt, and one of his sailors dived down to assess the damage.

Within moments they had located a hole two meters in width on the steamer's underside.

Such a leak could not be patched, and with its paddle wheels half swamped, the Scotia had no choice but to continue its voyage.

By then it lay 300 miles from Cape Clear, and after three days of delay that filled Liverpool with acute anxiety, it entered the company docks.

The engineers then proceeded to inspect the Scotia, which had been put in dry dock.

They couldn't believe their eyes.

Two and a half meters below its waterline, there gaped a symmetrical gash in the shape of an isosceles triangle.

This breach in the sheet iron was so perfectly formed, no punch could have done a cleaner job of it.

Consequently, it must have been produced by a perforating tool of uncommon toughness-- plus, after being launched with prodigious power and then piercing four centimeters of sheet iron, this tool had needed to withdraw itself by a backward motion truly inexplicable.

This was the last straw, and it resulted in arousing public passions all over again.

Indeed, from this moment on, any maritime casualty without an established cause was charged to the monster's account.

This outrageous animal had to shoulder responsibility for all derelict vessels, whose numbers are unfortunately considerable, since out of those 3,000 ships whose losses are recorded annually at the marine insurance bureau, the figure for steam or sailing ships supposedly lost with all hands, in the absence of any news, amounts to at least 200!

Now then, justly or unjustly, it was the "monster"

who stood accused of their disappearance; and since, thanks to it, travel between the various continents had become more and more dangerous, the public spoke up and demanded straight out that, at all cost, the seas be purged of this fearsome cetacean.

The Pros and Cons DURING THE PERIOD in which these developments were occurring, I had returned from a scientific undertaking organized to explore the Nebraska badlands in the United States.

In my capacity as Assistant Professor at the Paris Museum of Natural History, I had been attached to this expedition by the French government.

After spending six months in Nebraska, I arrived in New York laden with valuable collections near the end of March.

My departure for France was set for early May.

In the meantime, then, I was busy classifying my mineralogical, botanical, and zoological treasures when that incident took place with the Scotia.

I was perfectly abreast of this question, which was the big news of the day, and how could I not have been?

I had read and reread every American and European newspaper without being any farther along.

This mystery puzzled me.

Finding it impossible to form any views, I drifted from one extreme to the other.

Something was out there, that much was certain, and any doubting Thomas was invited to place his finger on the Scotia's wound.

When I arrived in New York, the question was at the boiling point.

The hypothesis of a drifting islet or an elusive reef, put forward by people not quite in their right minds, was completely eliminated.

And indeed, unless this reef had an engine in its belly, how could it move about with such prodigious speed?

Also discredited was the idea of a floating hull or some other enormous wreckage, and again because of this speed of movement.

So only two possible solutions to the question were left, creating two very distinct groups of supporters: on one side, those favoring a monster of colossal strength; on the other, those favoring an "underwater boat"

of tremendous motor power.

Now then, although the latter hypothesis was completely admissible, it couldn't stand up to inquiries conducted in both the New World and the Old.

That a private individual had such a mechanism at his disposal was less than probable.

Where and when had he built it, and how could he have built it in secret?

Only some government could own such an engine of destruction, and in these disaster-filled times, when men tax their ingenuity to build increasingly powerful aggressive weapons, it was possible that, unknown to the rest of the world, some nation could have been testing such a fearsome machine.

The Chassepot rifle led to the torpedo, and the torpedo has led to this underwater battering ram, which in turn will lead to the world putting its foot down.

At least I hope it will.

But this hypothesis of a war machine collapsed in the face of formal denials from the various governments.

Since the public interest was at stake and transoceanic travel was suffering, the sincerity of these governments could not be doubted.

Besides, how could the assembly of this underwater boat have escaped public notice?

Keeping a secret under such circumstances would be difficult enough for an individual, and certainly impossible for a nation whose every move is under constant surveillance by rival powers.

So, after inquiries conducted in England, France, Russia, Prussia, Spain, Italy, America, and even Turkey, the hypothesis of an underwater Monitor was ultimately rejected.

And so the monster surfaced again, despite the endless witticisms heaped on it by the popular press, and the human imagination soon got caught up in the most ridiculous ichthyological fantasies.

After I arrived in New York, several people did me the honor of consulting me on the phenomenon in question.

In France I had published a two-volume work, in quarto, entitled The Mysteries of the Great Ocean Depths.

Well received in scholarly circles, this book had established me as a specialist in this pretty obscure field of natural history.

My views were in demand.

As long as I could deny the reality of the business, I confined myself to a flat "no comment."

But soon, pinned to the wall, I had to explain myself straight out.

And in this vein, "the honorable Pierre Aronnax, Professor at the Paris Museum,"

was summoned by The New York Herald to formulate his views no matter what.

I complied.

Since I could no longer hold my tongue, I let it wag.

I discussed the question in its every aspect, both political and scientific, and this is an excerpt from the well-padded article I published in the issue of April 30.

"Therefore,"

I wrote, "after examining these different hypotheses one by one, we are forced, every other supposition having been refuted, to accept the existence of an extremely powerful marine animal.

"The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us.

No soundings have been able to reach them.

What goes on in those distant depths?

What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit, those regions twelve or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water?

What is the constitution of these animals?

It's almost beyond conjecture.

"However, the solution to this problem submitted to me can take the form of a choice between two alternatives.

"Either we know every variety of creature populating our planet, or we do not.

"If we do not know every one of them, if nature still keeps ichthyological secrets from us, nothing is more admissible than to accept the existence of fish or cetaceans of new species or even new genera, animals with a basically 'cast-iron' constitution that inhabit strata beyond the reach of our soundings, and which some development or other, an urge or a whim if you prefer, can bring to the upper level of the ocean for long intervals.

"If, on the other hand, we do know every living species, we must look for the animal in question among those marine creatures already cataloged, and in this event I would be inclined to accept the existence of a giant narwhale.

"The common narwhale, or sea unicorn, often reaches a length of sixty feet.

Increase its dimensions fivefold or even tenfold, then give this cetacean a strength in proportion to its size while enlarging its offensive weapons, and you have the animal we're looking for.

It would have the proportions determined by the officers of the Shannon, the instrument needed to perforate the Scotia, and the power to pierce a steamer's hull.

"In essence, the narwhale is armed with a sort of ivory sword, or lance, as certain naturalists have expressed it.

It's a king-sized tooth as hard as steel.

Some of these teeth have been found buried in the bodies of baleen whales, which the narwhale attacks with invariable success.

Others have been wrenched, not without difficulty, from the undersides of vessels that narwhales have pierced clean through, as a gimlet pierces a wine barrel.

The museum at the Faculty of Medicine in Paris owns one of these tusks with a length of 2.25 meters and a width at its base of forty-eight centimeters!

"All right then!

Imagine this weapon to be ten times stronger and the animal ten times more powerful, launch it at a speed of twenty miles per hour, multiply its mass times its velocity, and you get just the collision we need to cause the specified catastrophe.

"So, until information becomes more abundant, I plump for a sea unicorn of colossal dimensions, no longer armed with a mere lance but with an actual spur, like ironclad frigates or those warships called 'rams,' whose mass and motor power it would possess simultaneously.

"This inexplicable phenomenon is thus explained away--unless it's something else entirely, which, despite everything that has been sighted, studied, explored and experienced, is still possible!"

These last words were cowardly of me; but as far as I could, I wanted to protect my professorial dignity and not lay myself open to laughter from the Americans, who when they do laugh, laugh raucously.

I had left myself a loophole.

Yet deep down, I had accepted the existence of "the monster."

My article was hotly debated, causing a fine old uproar.

It rallied a number of supporters.

Moreover, the solution it proposed allowed for free play of the imagination.

The human mind enjoys impressive visions of unearthly creatures.

Now then, the sea is precisely their best medium, the only setting suitable for the breeding and growing of such giants--next to which such land animals as elephants or rhinoceroses are mere dwarves.

The liquid masses support the largest known species of mammals and perhaps conceal mollusks of incomparable size or crustaceans too frightful to contemplate, such as 100-meter lobsters or crabs weighing 200 metric tons!

Why not?

Formerly, in prehistoric days, land animals (quadrupeds, apes, reptiles, birds) were built on a gigantic scale.

Our Creator cast them using a colossal mold that time has gradually made smaller.

With its untold depths, couldn't the sea keep alive such huge specimens of life from another age, this sea that never changes while the land masses undergo almost continuous alteration?

Couldn't the heart of the ocean hide the last-remaining varieties of these titanic species, for whom years are centuries and centuries millennia?

But I mustn't let these fantasies run away with me!

Enough of these fairy tales that time has changed for me into harsh realities.

I repeat: opinion had crystallized as to the nature of this phenomenon, and the public accepted without argument the existence of a prodigious creature that had nothing in common with the fabled sea serpent.

Yet if some saw it purely as a scientific problem to be solved, more practical people, especially in America and England, were determined to purge the ocean of this daunting monster, to insure the safety of transoceanic travel.

The industrial and commercial newspapers dealt with the question chiefly from this viewpoint.

The Shipping & Mercantile Gazette, the Lloyd's List, France's Packetboat and Maritime & Colonial Review, all the rags devoted to insurance companies--who threatened to raise their premium rates-- were unanimous on this point.

Public opinion being pronounced, the States of the Union were the first in the field.

In New York preparations were under way for an expedition designed to chase this narwhale.

A high-speed frigate, the Abraham Lincoln, was fitted out for putting to sea as soon as possible.

The naval arsenals were unlocked for Commander Farragut, who pressed energetically forward with the arming of his frigate.

But, as it always happens, just when a decision had been made to chase the monster, the monster put in no further appearances.

For two months nobody heard a word about it.

Not a single ship encountered it.

Apparently the unicorn had gotten wise to these plots being woven around it.

People were constantly babbling about the creature, even via the Atlantic Cable!

Accordingly, the wags claimed that this slippery rascal had waylaid some passing telegram and was making the most of it.

So the frigate was equipped for a far-off voyage and armed with fearsome fishing gear, but nobody knew where to steer it.

And impatience grew until, on June 2, word came that the Tampico, a steamer on the San Francisco line sailing from California to Shanghai, had sighted the animal again, three weeks before in the northerly seas of the Pacific.

This news caused intense excitement.

Not even a 24-hour breather was granted to Commander Farragut.

His provisions were loaded on board.

His coal bunkers were overflowing.

Not a crewman was missing from his post.

To cast off, he needed only to fire and stoke his furnaces!

Half a day's delay would have been unforgivable!

But Commander Farragut wanted nothing more than to go forth.

I received a letter three hours before the Abraham Lincoln left its Brooklyn pier;* the letter read as follows: *Author's Note: A pier is a type of wharf expressly set aside for an individual vessel.

Pierre Aronnax Professor at the Paris Museum Fifth Avenue Hotel New York Sir: If you would like to join the expedition on the Abraham Lincoln, the government of the Union will be pleased to regard you as France's representative in this undertaking.

Commander Farragut has a cabin at your disposal.

Very cordially yours, J.

B.

HOBSON, Secretary of the Navy.

As Master Wishes THREE SECONDS before the arrival of J.

B.

Hobson's letter, I no more dreamed of chasing the unicorn than of trying for the Northwest Passage.

Three seconds after reading this letter from the honorable Secretary of the Navy, I understood at last that my true vocation, my sole purpose in life, was to hunt down this disturbing monster and rid the world of it.

Even so, I had just returned from an arduous journey, exhausted and badly needing a rest.

I wanted nothing more than to see my country again, my friends, my modest quarters by the Botanical Gardens, my dearly beloved collections!

But now nothing could hold me back.

I forgot everything else, and without another thought of exhaustion, friends, or collections, I accepted the American government's offer.

"Besides,"

I mused, "all roads lead home to Europe, and our unicorn may be gracious enough to take me toward the coast of France!

That fine animal may even let itself be captured in European seas--as a personal favor to me--and I'll bring back to the Museum of Natural History at least half a meter of its ivory lance!"

But in the meantime I would have to look for this narwhale in the northern Pacific Ocean; which meant returning to France by way of the Antipodes.

"Conseil!"

I called in an impatient voice.

Conseil was my manservant.

A devoted lad who went with me on all my journeys; a gallant Flemish boy whom I genuinely liked and who returned the compliment; a born stoic, punctilious on principle, habitually hardworking, rarely startled by life's surprises, very skillful with his hands, efficient in his every duty, and despite his having a name that means "counsel,"

never giving advice-- not even the unsolicited kind!

From rubbing shoulders with scientists in our little universe by the Botanical Gardens, the boy had come to know a thing or two.

In Conseil I had a seasoned specialist in biological classification, an enthusiast who could run with acrobatic agility up and down the whole ladder of branches, groups, classes, subclasses, orders, families, genera, subgenera, species, and varieties.

But there his science came to a halt.

Classifying was everything to him, so he knew nothing else.

Well versed in the theory of classification, he was poorly versed in its practical application, and I doubt that he could tell a sperm whale from a baleen whale!

And yet, what a fine, gallant lad!

For the past ten years, Conseil had gone with me wherever science beckoned.

Not once did he comment on the length or the hardships of a journey.

Never did he object to buckling up his suitcase for any country whatever, China or the Congo, no matter how far off it was.

He went here, there, and everywhere in perfect contentment.

Moreover, he enjoyed excellent health that defied all ailments, owned solid muscles, but hadn't a nerve in him, not a sign of nerves-- the mental type, I mean.

The lad was thirty years old, and his age to that of his employer was as fifteen is to twenty.

Please forgive me for this underhanded way of admitting I had turned forty.

But Conseil had one flaw.

He was a fanatic on formality, and he only addressed me in the third person--to the point where it got tiresome.

"Conseil!"

I repeated, while feverishly beginning my preparations for departure.

To be sure, I had confidence in this devoted lad.

Ordinarily, I never asked whether or not it suited him to go with me on my journeys; but this time an expedition was at issue that could drag on indefinitely, a hazardous undertaking whose purpose was to hunt an animal that could sink a frigate as easily as a walnut shell!

There was good reason to stop and think, even for the world's most emotionless man.

What would Conseil say?

"Conseil!"

I called a third time.

Conseil appeared.

"Did master summon me?"

he said, entering.

"Yes, my boy.

Get my things ready, get yours ready.

We're departing in two hours."

"As master wishes,"

Conseil replied serenely.

"We haven't a moment to lose.

Pack as much into my trunk as you can, my traveling kit, my suits, shirts, and socks, don't bother counting, just squeeze it all in--and hurry!"

"What about master's collections?"

Conseil ventured to observe.

"We'll deal with them later."

"What!

The archaeotherium, hyracotherium, oreodonts, cheiropotamus, and master's other fossil skeletons?"

"The hotel will keep them for us."

"What about master's live babirusa?"

"They'll feed it during our absence.

Anyhow, we'll leave instructions to ship the whole menagerie to France."

"Then we aren't returning to Paris?"

Conseil asked.

"Yes, we are .

.

.

certainly .

.

.

,"

I replied evasively, "but after we make a detour."

"Whatever detour master wishes."

"Oh, it's nothing really!

A route slightly less direct, that's all.

We're leaving on the Abraham Lincoln."

"As master thinks best,"

Conseil replied placidly.

"You see, my friend, it's an issue of the monster, the notorious narwhale.

We're going to rid the seas of it!

of the Great Ocean Depths has no excuse for not setting sail with Commander Farragut.

It's a glorious mission but also a dangerous one!

We don't know where it will take us!

These beasts can be quite unpredictable!

But we're going just the same!

We have a commander who's game for anything!"

"What master does, I'll do,"

Conseil replied.

"But think it over, because I don't want to hide anything from you.

This is one of those voyages from which people don't always come back!"

"As master wishes."

A quarter of an hour later, our trunks were ready.

Conseil did them in a flash, and I was sure the lad hadn't missed a thing, because he classified shirts and suits as expertly as birds and mammals.

The hotel elevator dropped us off in the main vestibule on the mezzanine.

I went down a short stair leading to the ground floor.

I settled my bill at that huge counter that was always under siege by a considerable crowd.

I left instructions for shipping my containers of stuffed animals and dried plants to Paris, France.

I opened a line of credit sufficient to cover the babirusa and, Conseil at my heels, I jumped into a carriage.

For a fare of twenty francs, the vehicle went down Broadway to Union Square, took Fourth Ave.

to its junction with Bowery St., turned into Katrin St.

and halted at Pier 34.

There the Katrin ferry transferred men, horses, and carriage to Brooklyn, that great New York annex located on the left bank of the East River, and in a few minutes we arrived at the wharf next to which the Abraham Lincoln was vomiting torrents of black smoke from its two funnels.

Our baggage was immediately carried to the deck of the frigate.

I rushed aboard.

I asked for Commander Farragut.

One of the sailors led me to the afterdeck, where I stood in the presence of a smart-looking officer who extended his hand to me.

"Professor Pierre Aronnax?"

he said to me.

"The same,"

I replied.

"Commander Farragut?"

"In person.

Welcome aboard, professor.

Your cabin is waiting for you."

I bowed, and letting the commander attend to getting under way, I was taken to the cabin that had been set aside for me.

The Abraham Lincoln had been perfectly chosen and fitted out for its new assignment.

It was a high-speed frigate furnished with superheating equipment that allowed the tension of its steam to build to seven atmospheres.

Under this pressure the Abraham Lincoln reached an average speed of 18.3 miles per hour, a considerable speed but still not enough to cope with our gigantic cetacean.

The frigate's interior accommodations complemented its nautical virtues.

I was well satisfied with my cabin, which was located in the stern and opened into the officers' mess.

"We'll be quite comfortable here,"

I told Conseil.

"With all due respect to master,"

Conseil replied, "as comfortable as a hermit crab inside the shell of a whelk."

I left Conseil to the proper stowing of our luggage and climbed on deck to watch the preparations for getting under way.

Just then Commander Farragut was giving orders to cast off the last moorings holding the Abraham Lincoln to its Brooklyn pier.

And so if I'd been delayed by a quarter of an hour or even less, the frigate would have gone without me, and I would have missed out on this unearthly, extraordinary, and inconceivable expedition, whose true story might well meet with some skepticism.

But Commander Farragut didn't want to waste a single day, or even a single hour, in making for those seas where the animal had just been sighted.

He summoned his engineer.

"Are we up to pressure?"

he asked the man.

"Aye, sir,"

the engineer replied.

"Go ahead, then!"

Commander Farragut called.

At this order, which was relayed to the engine by means of a compressed-air device, the mechanics activated the start-up wheel.

Steam rushed whistling into the gaping valves.

Long horizontal pistons groaned and pushed the tie rods of the drive shaft.

The blades of the propeller churned the waves with increasing speed, and the Abraham Lincoln moved out majestically amid a spectator-laden escort of some 100 ferries and tenders.* *Author's Note: Tenders are small steamboats that assist the big liners.

The wharves of Brooklyn, and every part of New York bordering the East River, were crowded with curiosity seekers.

Departing from 500,000 throats, three cheers burst forth in succession.

Thousands of handkerchiefs were waving above these tightly packed masses, hailing the Abraham Lincoln until it reached the waters of the Hudson River, at the tip of the long peninsula that forms New York City.

The frigate then went along the New Jersey coast--the wonderful right bank of this river, all loaded down with country homes-- and passed by the forts to salutes from their biggest cannons.

The Abraham Lincoln replied by three times lowering and hoisting the American flag, whose thirty-nine stars gleamed from the gaff of the mizzen sail; then, changing speed to take the buoy-marked channel that curved into the inner bay formed by the spit of Sandy Hook, it hugged this sand-covered strip of land where thousands of spectators acclaimed us one more time.

The escort of boats and tenders still followed the frigate and only left us when we came abreast of the lightship, whose two signal lights mark the entrance of the narrows to Upper New York Bay.

Three o'clock then sounded.

The harbor pilot went down into his dinghy and rejoined a little schooner waiting for him to leeward.

The furnaces were stoked; the propeller churned the waves more swiftly; the frigate skirted the flat, yellow coast of Long Island; and at eight o'clock in the evening, after the lights of Fire Island had vanished into the northwest, we ran at full steam onto the dark waters of the Atlantic.

Ned Land COMMANDER FARRAGUT was a good seaman, worthy of the frigate he commanded.

His ship and he were one.

He was its very soul.

On the cetacean question no doubts arose in his mind, and he didn't allow the animal's existence to be disputed aboard his vessel.

He believed in it as certain pious women believe in the leviathan from the Book of Job--out of faith, not reason.

The monster existed, and he had vowed to rid the seas of it.

The man was a sort of Knight of Rhodes, a latter-day Sir Dieudonn of Gozo, on his way to fight an encounter with the dragon devastating the island.

Either Commander Farragut would slay the narwhale, or the narwhale would slay Commander Farragut.

No middle of the road for these two.

The ship's officers shared the views of their leader.

They could be heard chatting, discussing, arguing, calculating the different chances of an encounter, and observing the vast expanse of the ocean.

Voluntary watches from the crosstrees of the topgallant sail were self-imposed by more than one who would have cursed such toil under any other circumstances.

As often as the sun swept over its daily arc, the masts were populated with sailors whose feet itched and couldn't hold still on the planking of the deck below!

And the Abraham Lincoln's stempost hadn't even cut the suspected waters of the Pacific.

As for the crew, they only wanted to encounter the unicorn, harpoon it, haul it on board, and carve it up.

They surveyed the sea with scrupulous care.

Besides, Commander Farragut had mentioned that a certain sum of $2,000.00 was waiting for the man who first sighted the animal, be he cabin boy or sailor, mate or officer.

I'll let the reader decide whether eyes got proper exercise aboard the Abraham Lincoln.

As for me, I didn't lag behind the others and I yielded to no one my share in these daily observations.

Our frigate would have had fivescore good reasons for renaming itself the Argus, after that mythological beast with 100 eyes!

The lone rebel among us was Conseil, who seemed utterly uninterested in the question exciting us and was out of step with the general enthusiasm on board.

As I said, Commander Farragut had carefully equipped his ship with all the gear needed to fish for a gigantic cetacean.

No whaling vessel could have been better armed.

We had every known mechanism, from the hand-hurled harpoon, to the blunderbuss firing barbed arrows, to the duck gun with exploding bullets.

On the forecastle was mounted the latest model breech-loading cannon, very heavy of barrel and narrow of bore, a weapon that would figure in the Universal Exhibition of 1867.

Made in America, this valuable instrument could fire a four-kilogram conical projectile an average distance of sixteen kilometers without the least bother.

So the Abraham Lincoln wasn't lacking in means of destruction.

But it had better still.

It had Ned Land, the King of Harpooners.

Gifted with uncommon manual ability, Ned Land was a Canadian who had no equal in his dangerous trade.

Dexterity, coolness, bravery, and cunning were virtues he possessed to a high degree, and it took a truly crafty baleen whale or an exceptionally astute sperm whale to elude the thrusts of his harpoon.

Ned Land was about forty years old.

A man of great height--over six English feet--he was powerfully built, serious in manner, not very sociable, sometimes headstrong, and quite ill-tempered when crossed.

His looks caught the attention, and above all the strength of his gaze, which gave a unique emphasis to his facial appearance.

Commander Farragut, to my thinking, had made a wise move in hiring on this man.

With his eye and his throwing arm, he was worth the whole crew all by himself.

I can do no better than to compare him with a powerful telescope that could double as a cannon always ready to fire.

To say Canadian is to say French, and as unsociable as Ned Land was, I must admit he took a definite liking to me.

No doubt it was my nationality that attracted him.

It was an opportunity for him to speak, and for me to hear, that old Rabelaisian dialect still used in some Canadian provinces.

The harpooner's family originated in Quebec, and they were already a line of bold fishermen back in the days when this town still belonged to France.

Little by little Ned developed a taste for chatting, and I loved hearing the tales of his adventures in the polar seas.

He described his fishing trips and his battles with great natural lyricism.

His tales took on the form of an epic poem, and I felt I was hearing some Canadian Homer reciting his Iliad of the High Arctic regions.

I'm writing of this bold companion as I currently know him.

Because we've become old friends, united in that permanent comradeship born and cemented during only the most frightful crises!

Ah, my gallant Ned!

I ask only to live 100 years more, the longer to remember you!

And now, what were Ned Land's views on this question of a marine monster?

I must admit that he flatly didn't believe in the unicorn, and alone on board, he didn't share the general conviction.

He avoided even dealing with the subject, for which one day I felt compelled to take him to task.

During the magnificent evening of June 25--in other words, three weeks after our departure--the frigate lay abreast of Cabo Blanco, thirty miles to leeward of the coast of Patagonia.

We had crossed the Tropic of Capricorn, and the Strait of Magellan opened less than 700 miles to the south.

Before eight days were out, the Abraham Lincoln would plow the waves of the Pacific.

Seated on the afterdeck, Ned Land and I chatted about one thing and another, staring at that mysterious sea whose depths to this day are beyond the reach of human eyes.

Quite naturally, I led our conversation around to the giant unicorn, and I weighed our expedition's various chances for success or failure.

Then, seeing that Ned just let me talk without saying much himself, I pressed him more closely.

"Ned,"

I asked him, "how can you still doubt the reality of this cetacean we're after?

Do you have any particular reasons for being so skeptical?"

The harpooner stared at me awhile before replying, slapped his broad forehead in one of his standard gestures, closed his eyes as if to collect himself, and finally said: "Just maybe, Professor Aronnax."

"But Ned, you're a professional whaler, a man familiar with all the great marine mammals--your mind should easily accept this hypothesis of an enormous cetacean, and you ought to be the last one to doubt it under these circumstances!"

"That's just where you're mistaken, professor,"

Ned replied.

"The common man may still believe in fabulous comets crossing outer space, or in prehistoric monsters living at the earth's core, but astronomers and geologists don't swallow such fairy tales.

It's the same with whalers.

I've chased plenty of cetaceans, I've harpooned a good number, I've killed several.

But no matter how powerful and well armed they were, neither their tails or their tusks could puncture the sheet-iron plates of a steamer."

"Even so, Ned, people mention vessels that narwhale tusks have run clean through."

"Wooden ships maybe,"

the Canadian replied.

"But I've never seen the like.

So till I have proof to the contrary, I'll deny that baleen whales, sperm whales, or unicorns can do any such thing."

"Listen to me, Ned--"

"No, no, professor.

I'll go along with anything you want except that.

Some gigantic devilfish maybe .

.

.

?"

"Even less likely, Ned.

The devilfish is merely a mollusk, and even this name hints at its semiliquid flesh, because it's Latin meaning soft one.

The devilfish doesn't belong to the vertebrate branch, and even if it were 500 feet long, it would still be utterly harmless to ships like the Scotia or the Abraham Lincoln.

Consequently, the feats of krakens or other monsters of that ilk must be relegated to the realm of fiction."

"So, Mr.

Naturalist,"

Ned Land continued in a bantering tone, "you'll just keep on believing in the existence of some enormous cetacean .

.

.

?"

"Yes, Ned, I repeat it with a conviction backed by factual logic.

I believe in the existence of a mammal with a powerful constitution, belonging to the vertebrate branch like baleen whales, sperm whales, or dolphins, and armed with a tusk made of horn that has tremendous penetrating power."

"Humph!"

the harpooner put in, shaking his head with the attitude of a man who doesn't want to be convinced.

"Note well, my fine Canadian,"

I went on, "if such an animal exists, if it lives deep in the ocean, if it frequents the liquid strata located miles beneath the surface of the water, it needs to have a constitution so solid, it defies all comparison."

"And why this powerful constitution?"

Ned asked.

"Because it takes incalculable strength just to live in those deep strata and withstand their pressure."

"Oh really?"

Ned said, tipping me a wink.

"Oh really, and I can prove it to you with a few simple figures."

"Bosh!"

Ned replied.

"You can make figures do anything you want!"

"In business, Ned, but not in mathematics.

Listen to me.

Let's accept that the pressure of one atmosphere is represented by the pressure of a column of water thirty-two feet high.

In reality, such a column of water wouldn't be quite so high because here we're dealing with salt water, which is denser than fresh water.

Well then, when you dive under the waves, Ned, for every thirty-two feet of water above you, your body is tolerating the pressure of one more atmosphere, in other words, one more kilogram per each square centimeter on your body's surface.

So it follows that at 320 feet down, this pressure is equal to ten atmospheres, to 100 atmospheres at 3,200 feet, and to 1,000 atmospheres at 32,000 feet, that is, at about two and a half vertical leagues down.

Which is tantamount to saying that if you could reach such a depth in the ocean, each square centimeter on your body's surface would be experiencing 1,000 kilograms of pressure.

Now, my gallant Ned, do you know how many square centimeters you have on your bodily surface?"

"I haven't the foggiest notion, Professor Aronnax."

"About 17,000."

"As many as that?"

"Yes, and since the atmosphere's pressure actually weighs slightly more than one kilogram per square centimeter, your 17,000 square centimeters are tolerating 17,568 kilograms at this very moment."

"Without my noticing it?"

"Without your noticing it.

And if you aren't crushed by so much pressure, it's because the air penetrates the interior of your body with equal pressure.

When the inside and outside pressures are in perfect balance, they neutralize each other and allow you to tolerate them without discomfort.

But in the water it's another story."

"Yes, I see,"

Ned replied, growing more interested.

"Because the water surrounds me but doesn't penetrate me."

"Precisely, Ned.

So at thirty-two feet beneath the surface of the sea, you'll undergo a pressure of 17,568 kilograms; at 320 feet, or ten times greater pressure, it's 175,680 kilograms; at 3,200 feet, or 100 times greater pressure, it's 1,756,800 kilograms; finally, at 32,000 feet, or 1,000 times greater pressure, it's 17,568,000 kilograms; in other words, you'd be squashed as flat as if you'd just been yanked from between the plates of a hydraulic press!"

"Fire and brimstone!"

Ned put in.

"All right then, my fine harpooner, if vertebrates several hundred meters long and proportionate in bulk live at such depths, their surface areas make up millions of square centimeters, and the pressure they undergo must be assessed in billions of kilograms.

Calculate, then, how much resistance of bone structure and strength of constitution they'd need in order to withstand such pressures!"

"They'd need to be manufactured,"

Ned Land replied, "from sheet-iron plates eight inches thick, like ironclad frigates."

"Right, Ned, and then picture the damage such a mass could inflict if it were launched with the speed of an express train against a ship's hull."

"Yes .

.

.

indeed .

.

.

maybe,"

the Canadian replied, staggered by these figures but still not willing to give in.

"Well, have I convinced you?"

"You've convinced me of one thing, Mr.

Naturalist.

That deep in the sea, such animals would need to be just as strong as you say-- if they exist."

"But if they don't exist, my stubborn harpooner, how do you explain the accident that happened to the Scotia?"

"It's maybe .

.

.

,"

Ned said, hesitating.

"Go on!"

"Because .

.

.

it just couldn't be true!"

the Canadian replied, unconsciously echoing a famous catchphrase of the scientist Arago.

But this reply proved nothing, other than how bullheaded the harpooner could be.

That day I pressed him no further.

The Scotia's accident was undeniable.

Its hole was real enough that it had to be plugged up, and I don't think a hole's existence can be more emphatically proven.

Now then, this hole didn't make itself, and since it hadn't resulted from underwater rocks or underwater machines, it must have been caused by the perforating tool of some animal.

Now, for all the reasons put forward to this point, I believed that this animal was a member of the branch Vertebrata, class Mammalia, group Pisciforma, and finally, order Cetacea.

As for the family in which it would be placed (baleen whale, sperm whale, or dolphin), the genus to which it belonged, and the species in which it would find its proper home, these questions had to be left for later.

To answer them called for dissecting this unknown monster; to dissect it called for catching it; to catch it called for harpooning it-- which was Ned Land's business; to harpoon it called for sighting it-- which was the crew's business; and to sight it called for encountering it-- which was a chancy business.

At Random!

FOR SOME WHILE the voyage of the Abraham Lincoln was marked by no incident.

But one circumstance arose that displayed Ned Land's marvelous skills and showed just how much confidence we could place in him.

Off the Falkland Islands on June 30, the frigate came in contact with a fleet of American whalers, and we learned that they hadn't seen the narwhale.

But one of them, the captain of the Monroe, knew that Ned Land had shipped aboard the Abraham Lincoln and asked his help in hunting a baleen whale that was in sight.

Anxious to see Ned Land at work, Commander Farragut authorized him to make his way aboard the Monroe.

And the Canadian had such good luck that with a right-and-left shot, he harpooned not one whale but two, striking the first straight to the heart and catching the other after a few minutes' chase!

Assuredly, if the monster ever had to deal with Ned Land's harpoon, I wouldn't bet on the monster.

The frigate sailed along the east coast of South America with prodigious speed.

By July 3 we were at the entrance to the Strait of Magellan, abreast of Cabo de las Virgenes.

But Commander Farragut was unwilling to attempt this tortuous passageway and maneuvered instead to double Cape Horn.

The crew sided with him unanimously.

Indeed, were we likely to encounter the narwhale in such a cramped strait?

Many of our sailors swore that the monster couldn't negotiate this passageway simply because "he's too big for it!"

Near three o'clock in the afternoon on July 6, fifteen miles south of shore, the Abraham Lincoln doubled that solitary islet at the tip of the South American continent, that stray rock Dutch seamen had named Cape Horn after their hometown of Hoorn.

Our course was set for the northwest, and the next day our frigate's propeller finally churned the waters of the Pacific.

"Open your eyes!

Open your eyes!"

repeated the sailors of the Abraham Lincoln.

And they opened amazingly wide.

Eyes and spyglasses (a bit dazzled, it is true, by the vista of $2,000.00) didn't remain at rest for an instant.

Day and night we observed the surface of the ocean, and those with nyctalopic eyes, whose ability to see in the dark increased their chances by fifty percent, had an excellent shot at winning the prize.

As for me, I was hardly drawn by the lure of money and yet was far from the least attentive on board.

Snatching only a few minutes for meals and a few hours for sleep, come rain or come shine, I no longer left the ship's deck.

Sometimes bending over the forecastle railings, sometimes leaning against the sternrail, I eagerly scoured that cotton-colored wake that whitened the ocean as far as the eye could see!

And how many times I shared the excitement of general staff and crew when some unpredictable whale lifted its blackish back above the waves.

In an instant the frigate's deck would become densely populated.

The cowls over the companionways would vomit a torrent of sailors and officers.

With panting chests and anxious eyes, we each would observe the cetacean's movements.

I stared; I stared until I nearly went blind from a worn-out retina, while Conseil, as stoic as ever, kept repeating to me in a calm tone: "If master's eyes would kindly stop bulging, master will see farther!"

But what a waste of energy!

The Abraham Lincoln would change course and race after the animal sighted, only to find an ordinary baleen whale or a common sperm whale that soon disappeared amid a chorus of curses!

However, the weather held good.

Our voyage was proceeding under the most favorable conditions.

By then it was the bad season in these southernmost regions, because July in this zone corresponds to our January in Europe; but the sea remained smooth and easily visible over a vast perimeter.

Ned Land still kept up the most tenacious skepticism; beyond his spells on watch, he pretended that he never even looked at the surface of the waves, at least while no whales were in sight.

And yet the marvelous power of his vision could have performed yeoman service.

But this stubborn Canadian spent eight hours out of every twelve reading or sleeping in his cabin.

A hundred times I chided him for his unconcern.

"Bah!"

he replied.

"Nothing's out there, Professor Aronnax, and if there is some animal, what chance would we have of spotting it?

Can't you see we're just wandering around at random?

People say they've sighted this slippery beast again in the Pacific high seas-- I'm truly willing to believe it, but two months have already gone by since then, and judging by your narwhale's personality, it hates growing moldy from hanging out too long in the same waterways!

It's blessed with a terrific gift for getting around.

Now, professor, you know even better than I that nature doesn't violate good sense, and she wouldn't give some naturally slow animal the ability to move swiftly if it hadn't a need to use that talent.

So if the beast does exist, it's already long gone!"

I had no reply to this.

Obviously we were just groping blindly.

But how else could we go about it?

All the same, our chances were automatically pretty limited.

Yet everyone still felt confident of success, and not a sailor on board would have bet against the narwhale appearing, and soon.

On July 20 we cut the Tropic of Capricorn at longitude 105 degrees, and by the 27th of the same month, we had cleared the equator on the 110th meridian.

These bearings determined, the frigate took a more decisive westward heading and tackled the seas of the central Pacific.

Commander Farragut felt, and with good reason, that it was best to stay in deep waters and keep his distance from continents or islands, whose neighborhoods the animal always seemed to avoid--"No doubt,"

our bosun said, "because there isn't enough water for him!"

So the frigate kept well out when passing the Tuamotu, Marquesas, and Hawaiian Islands, then cut the Tropic of Cancer at longitude 132 degrees and headed for the seas of China.

We were finally in the area of the monster's latest antics!

And in all honesty, shipboard conditions became life-threatening.

Hearts were pounding hideously, gearing up for futures full of incurable aneurysms.

The entire crew suffered from a nervous excitement that it's beyond me to describe.

Nobody ate, nobody slept.

Twenty times a day some error in perception, or the optical illusions of some sailor perched in the crosstrees, would cause intolerable anguish, and this emotion, repeated twenty times over, kept us in a state of irritability so intense that a reaction was bound to follow.

And this reaction wasn't long in coming.

For three months, during which each day seemed like a century, the Abraham Lincoln plowed all the northerly seas of the Pacific, racing after whales sighted, abruptly veering off course, swerving sharply from one tack to another, stopping suddenly, putting on steam and reversing engines in quick succession, at the risk of stripping its gears, and it didn't leave a single point unexplored from the beaches of Japan to the coasts of America.

And we found nothing!

Nothing except an immenseness of deserted waves!

Nothing remotely resembling a gigantic narwhale, or an underwater islet, or a derelict shipwreck, or a runaway reef, or anything the least bit unearthly!

So the reaction set in.

At first, discouragement took hold of people's minds, opening the door to disbelief.

A new feeling appeared on board, made up of three-tenths shame and seven-tenths fury.

The crew called themselves "out-and-out fools"

for being hoodwinked by a fairy tale, then grew steadily more furious!

The mountains of arguments amassed over a year collapsed all at once, and each man now wanted only to catch up on his eating and sleeping, to make up for the time he had so stupidly sacrificed.

With typical human fickleness, they jumped from one extreme to the other.

Inevitably, the most enthusiastic supporters of the undertaking became its most energetic opponents.

This reaction mounted upward from the bowels of the ship, from the quarters of the bunker hands to the messroom of the general staff; and for certain, if it hadn't been for Commander Farragut's characteristic stubbornness, the frigate would ultimately have put back to that cape in the south.

But this futile search couldn't drag on much longer.

The Abraham Lincoln had done everything it could to succeed and had no reason to blame itself.

Never had the crew of an American naval craft shown more patience and zeal; they weren't responsible for this failure; there was nothing to do but go home.

A request to this effect was presented to the commander.

The commander stood his ground.

His sailors couldn't hide their discontent, and their work suffered because of it.

I'm unwilling to say that there was mutiny on board, but after a reasonable period of intransigence, Commander Farragut, like Christopher Columbus before him, asked for a grace period of just three days more.

After this three-day delay, if the monster hadn't appeared, our helmsman would give three turns of the wheel, and the Abraham Lincoln would chart a course toward European seas.

This promise was given on November 2.

It had the immediate effect of reviving the crew's failing spirits.

The ocean was observed with renewed care.

Each man wanted one last look with which to sum up his experience.

Spyglasses functioned with feverish energy.

A supreme challenge had been issued to the giant narwhale, and the latter had no acceptable excuse for ignoring this Summons to Appear!

Two days passed.

The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam.

On the offchance that the animal might be found in these waterways, a thousand methods were used to spark its interest or rouse it from its apathy.

Enormous sides of bacon were trailed in our wake, to the great satisfaction, I must say, of assorted sharks.

While the Abraham Lincoln heaved to, its longboats radiated in every direction around it and didn't leave a single point of the sea unexplored.

But the evening of November 4 arrived with this underwater mystery still unsolved.

At noon the next day, November 5, the agreed-upon delay expired.

After a position fix, true to his promise, Commander Farragut would have to set his course for the southeast and leave the northerly regions of the Pacific decisively behind.

By then the frigate lay in latitude 31 degrees 15' north and longitude 136 degrees 42' east.

The shores of Japan were less than 200 miles to our leeward.

Night was coming on.

Eight o'clock had just struck.

Huge clouds covered the moon's disk, then in its first quarter.

The sea undulated placidly beneath the frigate's stempost.

Just then I was in the bow, leaning over the starboard rail.

Conseil, stationed beside me, stared straight ahead.

Roosting in the shrouds, the crew examined the horizon, which shrank and darkened little by little.

Officers were probing the increasing gloom with their night glasses.

Sometimes the murky ocean sparkled beneath moonbeams that darted between the fringes of two clouds.

Then all traces of light vanished into the darkness.

Observing Conseil, I discovered that, just barely, the gallant lad had fallen under the general influence.

At least so I thought.

Perhaps his nerves were twitching with curiosity for the first time in history.

"Come on, Conseil!"

I told him.

"Here's your last chance to pocket that $2,000.00!"

"If master will permit my saying so,"

Conseil replied, "I never expected to win that prize, and the Union government could have promised $100,000.00 and been none the poorer."

"You're right, Conseil, it turned out to be a foolish business after all, and we jumped into it too hastily.

What a waste of time, what a futile expense of emotion!

Six months ago we could have been back in France--"

"In master's little apartment,"

Conseil answered.

"In master's museum!

And by now I would have classified master's fossils.

And master's babirusa would be ensconced in its cage at the zoo in the Botanical Gardens, and it would have attracted every curiosity seeker in town!"

"Quite so, Conseil, and what's more, I imagine that people will soon be poking fun at us!"

"To be sure,"

Conseil replied serenely, "I do think they'll have fun at master's expense.

And must it be said .

.

.

?"

"It must be said, Conseil."

"Well then, it will serve master right!"

"How true!"

"When one has the honor of being an expert as master is, one mustn't lay himself open to--"

Conseil didn't have time to complete the compliment.

In the midst of the general silence, a voice became audible.

It was Ned Land's voice, and it shouted: "Ahoy!

There's the thing in question, abreast of us to leeward!"

At Full Steam AT THIS SHOUT the entire crew rushed toward the harpooner-- commander, officers, mates, sailors, cabin boys, down to engineers leaving their machinery and stokers neglecting their furnaces.

The order was given to stop, and the frigate merely coasted.

By then the darkness was profound, and as good as the Canadian's eyes were, I still wondered how he could see--and what he had seen.

My heart was pounding fit to burst.

But Ned Land was not mistaken, and we all spotted the object his hand was indicating.

Two cable lengths off the Abraham Lincoln's starboard quarter, the sea seemed to be lit up from underneath.

This was no mere phosphorescent phenomenon, that much was unmistakable.

Submerged some fathoms below the surface of the water, the monster gave off that very intense but inexplicable glow that several captains had mentioned in their reports.

This magnificent radiance had to come from some force with a great illuminating capacity.

The edge of its light swept over the sea in an immense, highly elongated oval, condensing at the center into a blazing core whose unbearable glow diminished by degrees outward.

"It's only a cluster of phosphorescent particles!"

exclaimed one of the officers.

"No, sir,"

I answered with conviction.

"Not even angel-wing clams or salps have ever given off such a powerful light.

That glow is basically electric in nature.

Besides .

.

.

look, look!

It's shifting!

It's moving back and forth!

It's darting at us!"

A universal shout went up from the frigate.

"Quiet!"

Commander Farragut said.

"Helm hard to leeward!

Reverse engines!"

Sailors rushed to the helm, engineers to their machinery.

Under reverse steam immediately, the Abraham Lincoln beat to port, sweeping in a semicircle.

"Right your helm!

Engines forward!"

Commander Farragut called.

These orders were executed, and the frigate swiftly retreated from this core of light.

My mistake.

It wanted to retreat, but the unearthly animal came at us with a speed double our own.

We gasped.

More stunned than afraid, we stood mute and motionless.

The animal caught up with us, played with us.

It made a full circle around the frigate--then doing fourteen knots--and wrapped us in sheets of electricity that were like luminous dust.

Then it retreated two or three miles, leaving a phosphorescent trail comparable to those swirls of steam that shoot behind the locomotive of an express train.

Suddenly, all the way from the dark horizon where it had gone to gather momentum, the monster abruptly dashed toward the Abraham Lincoln with frightening speed, stopped sharply twenty feet from our side plates, and died out-- not by diving under the water, since its glow did not recede gradually-- but all at once, as if the source of this brilliant emanation had suddenly dried up.

Then it reappeared on the other side of the ship, either by circling around us or by gliding under our hull.

At any instant a collision could have occurred that would have been fatal to us.

Meanwhile I was astonished at the frigate's maneuvers.

It was fleeing, not fighting.

Built to pursue, it was being pursued, and I commented on this to Commander Farragut.

His face, ordinarily so emotionless, was stamped with indescribable astonishment.

"Professor Aronnax,"

he answered me, "I don't know what kind of fearsome creature I'm up against, and I don't want my frigate running foolish risks in all this darkness.

Besides, how should we attack this unknown creature, how should we defend ourselves against it?

Let's wait for daylight, and then we'll play a different role."

"You've no further doubts, commander, as to the nature of this animal?"

"No, sir, it's apparently a gigantic narwhale, and an electric one to boot."

"Maybe,"

I added, "it's no more approachable than an electric eel or an electric ray!"

"Right,"

the commander replied.

"And if it has their power to electrocute, it's surely the most dreadful animal ever conceived by our Creator.

That's why I'll keep on my guard, sir."

The whole crew stayed on their feet all night long.

No one even thought of sleeping.

Unable to compete with the monster's speed, the Abraham Lincoln slowed down and stayed at half steam.

For its part, the narwhale mimicked the frigate, simply rode with the waves, and seemed determined not to forsake the field of battle.

However, near midnight it disappeared, or to use a more appropriate expression, "it went out,"

like a huge glowworm.

Had it fled from us?

We were duty bound to fear so rather than hope so.

But at 12:53 in the morning, a deafening hiss became audible, resembling the sound made by a waterspout expelled with tremendous intensity.

By then Commander Farragut, Ned Land, and I were on the afterdeck, peering eagerly into the profound gloom.

"Ned Land,"

the commander asked, "you've often heard whales bellowing?"

"Often, sir, but never a whale like this, whose sighting earned me $2,000.00."

"Correct, the prize is rightfully yours.

But tell me, isn't that the noise cetaceans make when they spurt water from their blowholes?"

"The very noise, sir, but this one's way louder.

So there can be no mistake.

There's definitely a whale lurking in our waters.

With your permission, sir,"

the harpooner added, "tomorrow at daybreak we'll have words with it."

"If it's in a mood to listen to you, Mr.

Land,"

I replied in a tone far from convinced.

"Let me get within four harpoon lengths of it,"

the Canadian shot back, "and it had better listen!"

"But to get near it,"

the commander went on, "I'd have to put a whaleboat at your disposal?"

"Certainly, sir."

"That would be gambling with the lives of my men."

"And with my own!"

the harpooner replied simply.

Near two o'clock in the morning, the core of light reappeared, no less intense, five miles to windward of the Abraham Lincoln.

Despite the distance, despite the noise of wind and sea, we could distinctly hear the fearsome thrashings of the animal's tail, and even its panting breath.

Seemingly, the moment this enormous narwhale came up to breathe at the surface of the ocean, air was sucked into its lungs like steam into the huge cylinders of a 2,000-horsepower engine.

"Hmm!"

I said to myself.

"A cetacean as powerful as a whole cavalry regiment--now that's a whale of a whale!"

We stayed on the alert until daylight, getting ready for action.

Whaling gear was set up along the railings.

Our chief officer loaded the blunderbusses, which can launch harpoons as far as a mile, and long duck guns with exploding bullets that can mortally wound even the most powerful animals.

Ned Land was content to sharpen his harpoon, a dreadful weapon in his hands.

At six o'clock day began to break, and with the dawn's early light, the narwhale's electric glow disappeared.

At seven o'clock the day was well along, but a very dense morning mist shrank the horizon, and our best spyglasses were unable to pierce it.

The outcome: disappointment and anger.

I hoisted myself up to the crosstrees of the mizzen sail.

Some officers were already perched on the mastheads.

At eight o'clock the mist rolled ponderously over the waves, and its huge curls were lifting little by little.

The horizon grew wider and clearer all at once.

Suddenly, just as on the previous evening, Ned Land's voice was audible.

"There's the thing in question, astern to port!"

the harpooner shouted.

Every eye looked toward the point indicated.

There, a mile and a half from the frigate, a long blackish body emerged a meter above the waves.

Quivering violently, its tail was creating a considerable eddy.

Never had caudal equipment thrashed the sea with such power.

An immense wake of glowing whiteness marked the animal's track, sweeping in a long curve.

Our frigate drew nearer to the cetacean.

I examined it with a completely open mind.

Those reports from the Shannon and the Helvetia had slightly exaggerated its dimensions, and I put its length at only 250 feet.

Its girth was more difficult to judge, but all in all, the animal seemed to be wonderfully proportioned in all three dimensions.

While I was observing this phenomenal creature, two jets of steam and water sprang from its blowholes and rose to an altitude of forty meters, which settled for me its mode of breathing.

From this I finally concluded that it belonged to the branch Vertebrata, class Mammalia, subclass Monodelphia, group Pisciforma, order Cetacea, family .

.

.

but here I couldn't make up my mind.

The order Cetacea consists of three families, baleen whales, sperm whales, dolphins, and it's in this last group that narwhales are placed.

Each of these families is divided into several genera, each genus into species, each species into varieties.

So I was still missing variety, species, genus, and family, but no doubt I would complete my classifying with the aid of Heaven and Commander Farragut.

The crew were waiting impatiently for orders from their leader.

The latter, after carefully observing the animal, called for his engineer.

The engineer raced over.

"Sir,"

the commander said, "are you up to pressure?"

"Aye, sir,"

the engineer replied.

"Fine.

Stoke your furnaces and clap on full steam!"

Three cheers greeted this order.

The hour of battle had sounded.

A few moments later, the frigate's two funnels vomited torrents of black smoke, and its deck quaked from the trembling of its boilers.

Driven forward by its powerful propeller, the Abraham Lincoln headed straight for the animal.

Unconcerned, the latter let us come within half a cable length; then, not bothering to dive, it got up a little speed, retreated, and was content to keep its distance.

This chase dragged on for about three-quarters of an hour without the frigate gaining two fathoms on the cetacean.

At this rate, it was obvious that we would never catch up with it.

Infuriated, Commander Farragut kept twisting the thick tuft of hair that flourished below his chin.

"Ned Land!"

he called.

The Canadian reported at once.

"Well, Mr.

Land,"

the commander asked, "do you still advise putting my longboats to sea?"

"No, sir,"

Ned Land replied, "because that beast won't be caught against its will."

"Then what should we do?"

"Stoke up more steam, sir, if you can.

As for me, with your permission I'll go perch on the bobstays under the bowsprit, and if we can get within a harpoon length, I'll harpoon the brute."

"Go to it, Ned,"

Commander Farragut replied.

"Engineer,"

he called, "keep the pressure mounting!"

Ned Land made his way to his post.

The furnaces were urged into greater activity; our propeller did forty-three revolutions per minute, and steam shot from the valves.

Heaving the log, we verified that the Abraham Lincoln was going at the rate of 18.5 miles per hour.

But that damned animal also did a speed of 18.5.

For the next hour our frigate kept up this pace without gaining a fathom!

This was humiliating for one of the fastest racers in the American navy.

The crew were working up into a blind rage.

Sailor after sailor heaved insults at the monster, which couldn't be bothered with answering back.

Commander Farragut was no longer content simply to twist his goatee; he chewed on it.

The engineer was summoned once again.

"You're up to maximum pressure?"

the commander asked him.

"Aye, sir,"

the engineer replied.

"And your valves are charged to .

.

.

?"

"To six and a half atmospheres."

"Charge them to ten atmospheres."

A typical American order if I ever heard one.

It would have sounded just fine during some Mississippi paddle-wheeler race, to "outstrip the competition!"

"Conseil,"

I said to my gallant servant, now at my side, "you realize that we'll probably blow ourselves skyhigh?"

"As master wishes!"

Conseil replied.

All right, I admit it: I did wish to run this risk!

The valves were charged.

More coal was swallowed by the furnaces.

Ventilators shot torrents of air over the braziers.

The Abraham Lincoln's speed increased.

Its masts trembled down to their blocks, and swirls of smoke could barely squeeze through the narrow funnels.

We heaved the log a second time.

"Well, helmsman?"

Commander Farragut asked.

"19.3 miles per hour, sir."

"Keep stoking the furnaces."

The engineer did so.

The pressure gauge marked ten atmospheres.

But no doubt the cetacean itself had "warmed up,"

because without the least trouble, it also did 19.3.

What a chase!

No, I can't describe the excitement that shook my very being.

Ned Land stayed at his post, harpoon in hand.

Several times the animal let us approach.

"We're overhauling it!"

the Canadian would shout.

Then, just as he was about to strike, the cetacean would steal off with a swiftness I could estimate at no less than thirty miles per hour.

And even at our maximum speed, it took the liberty of thumbing its nose at the frigate by running a full circle around us!

A howl of fury burst from every throat!

By noon we were no farther along than at eight o'clock in the morning.

Commander Farragut then decided to use more direct methods.

"Bah!"

he said.

"So that animal is faster than the Abraham Lincoln.

All right, we'll see if it can outrun our conical shells!

Mate, man the gun in the bow!"

Our forecastle cannon was immediately loaded and leveled.

The cannoneer fired a shot, but his shell passed some feet above the cetacean, which stayed half a mile off.

"Over to somebody with better aim!"

the commander shouted.

"And $500.00 to the man who can pierce that infernal beast!"

Calm of eye, cool of feature, an old gray-bearded gunner-- I can see him to this day--approached the cannon, put it in position, and took aim for a good while.

There was a mighty explosion, mingled with cheers from the crew.

The shell reached its target; it hit the animal, but not in the usual fashion--it bounced off that rounded surface and vanished into the sea two miles out.

"Oh drat!"

said the old gunner in his anger.

"That rascal must be covered with six-inch armor plate!"

"Curse the beast!"

Commander Farragut shouted.

The hunt was on again, and Commander Farragut leaned over to me, saying: "I'll chase that animal till my frigate explodes!"

"Yes,"

I replied, "and nobody would blame you!"

We could still hope that the animal would tire out and not be as insensitive to exhaustion as our steam engines.

But no such luck.

Hour after hour went by without it showing the least sign of weariness.

However, to the Abraham Lincoln's credit, it must be said that we struggled on with tireless persistence.

I estimate that we covered a distance of at least 500 kilometers during this ill-fated day of November 6.

But night fell and wrapped the surging ocean in its shadows.

By then I thought our expedition had come to an end, that we would never see this fantastic animal again.

I was mistaken.

At 10:50 in the evening, that electric light reappeared three miles to windward of the frigate, just as clear and intense as the night before.

The narwhale seemed motionless.

Was it asleep perhaps, weary from its workday, just riding with the waves?

This was our chance, and Commander Farragut was determined to take full advantage of it.

He gave his orders.

The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam, advancing cautiously so as not to awaken its adversary.

In midocean it's not unusual to encounter whales so sound asleep they can successfully be attacked, and Ned Land had harpooned more than one in its slumber.

The Canadian went to resume his post on the bobstays under the bowsprit.

The frigate approached without making a sound, stopped two cable lengths from the animal and coasted.

Not a soul breathed on board.

A profound silence reigned over the deck.

We were not 100 feet from the blazing core of light, whose glow grew stronger and dazzled the eyes.

Just then, leaning over the forecastle railing, I saw Ned Land below me, one hand grasping the martingale, the other brandishing his dreadful harpoon.

Barely twenty feet separated him from the motionless animal.

All at once his arm shot forward and the harpoon was launched.

I heard the weapon collide resonantly, as if it had hit some hard substance.

The electric light suddenly went out, and two enormous waterspouts crashed onto the deck of the frigate, racing like a torrent from stem to stern, toppling crewmen, breaking spare masts and yardarms from their lashings.

A hideous collision occurred, and thrown over the rail with no time to catch hold of it, I was hurled into the sea.

A Whale of Unknown Species ALTHOUGH I WAS startled by this unexpected descent, I at least have a very clear recollection of my sensations during it.

At first I was dragged about twenty feet under.

I'm a good swimmer, without claiming to equal such other authors as Byron and Edgar Allan Poe, who were master divers, and I didn't lose my head on the way down.

With two vigorous kicks of the heel, I came back to the surface of the sea.

My first concern was to look for the frigate.

Had the crew seen me go overboard?

Was the Abraham Lincoln tacking about?

Would Commander Farragut put a longboat to sea?

Could I hope to be rescued?

The gloom was profound.

I glimpsed a black mass disappearing eastward, where its running lights were fading out in the distance.

It was the frigate.

I felt I was done for.

"Help!

Help!"

I shouted, swimming desperately toward the Abraham Lincoln.

My clothes were weighing me down.

The water glued them to my body, they were paralyzing my movements.

I was sinking!

I was suffocating .

.

.

!

"Help!"

This was the last shout I gave.

My mouth was filling with water.

I struggled against being dragged into the depths.

.

.

.

Suddenly my clothes were seized by energetic hands, I felt myself pulled abruptly back to the surface of the sea, and yes, I heard these words pronounced in my ear: "If master would oblige me by leaning on my shoulder, master will swim with much greater ease."

With one hand I seized the arm of my loyal Conseil.

"You!"

I said.

"You!"

"Myself,"

Conseil replied, "and at master's command."

"That collision threw you overboard along with me?"

"Not at all.

But being in master's employ, I followed master."

The fine lad thought this only natural!

"What about the frigate?"

I asked.

"The frigate?"

Conseil replied, rolling over on his back.

"I think master had best not depend on it to any great extent!"

"What are you saying?"

"I'm saying that just as I jumped overboard, I heard the men at the helm shout, 'Our propeller and rudder are smashed!' "

"Smashed?"

"Yes, smashed by the monster's tusk!

I believe it's the sole injury the Abraham Lincoln has sustained.

But most inconveniently for us, the ship can no longer steer."

"Then we're done for!"

"Perhaps,"

Conseil replied serenely.

"However, we still have a few hours before us, and in a few hours one can do a great many things!"

Conseil's unflappable composure cheered me up.

I swam more vigorously, but hampered by clothes that were as restricting as a cloak made of lead, I was managing with only the greatest difficulty.

Conseil noticed as much.

"Master will allow me to make an incision,"

he said.

And he slipped an open clasp knife under my clothes, slitting them from top to bottom with one swift stroke.

Then he briskly undressed me while I swam for us both.

I then did Conseil the same favor, and we continued to "navigate"

side by side.

But our circumstances were no less dreadful.

Perhaps they hadn't seen us go overboard; and even if they had, the frigate-- being undone by its rudder--couldn't return to leeward after us.

So we could count only on its longboats.

Conseil had coolly reasoned out this hypothesis and laid his plans accordingly.

An amazing character, this boy; in midocean, this stoic lad seemed right at home!

So, having concluded that our sole chance for salvation lay in being picked up by the Abraham Lincoln's longboats, we had to take steps to wait for them as long as possible.

Consequently, I decided to divide our energies so we wouldn't both be worn out at the same time, and this was the arrangement: while one of us lay on his back, staying motionless with arms crossed and legs outstretched, the other would swim and propel his partner forward.

This towing role was to last no longer than ten minutes, and by relieving each other in this way, we could stay afloat for hours, perhaps even until daybreak.

Slim chance, but hope springs eternal in the human breast!

Besides, there were two of us.

Lastly, I can vouch--as improbable as it seems--that even if I had wanted to destroy all my illusions, even if I had been willing to "give in to despair,"

I could not have done so!

The cetacean had rammed our frigate at about eleven o'clock in the evening.

I therefore calculated on eight hours of swimming until sunrise.

A strenuous task, but feasible, thanks to our relieving each other.

The sea was pretty smooth and barely tired us.

Sometimes I tried to peer through the dense gloom, which was broken only by the phosphorescent flickers coming from our movements.

I stared at the luminous ripples breaking over my hands, shimmering sheets spattered with blotches of bluish gray.

It seemed as if we'd plunged into a pool of quicksilver.

Near one o'clock in the morning, I was overcome with tremendous exhaustion.

My limbs stiffened in the grip of intense cramps.

Conseil had to keep me going, and attending to our self-preservation became his sole responsibility.

I soon heard the poor lad gasping; his breathing became shallow and quick.

I didn't think he could stand such exertions for much longer.

"Go on!

Go on!"

I told him.

"Leave master behind?"

he replied.

"Never!

I'll drown before he does!"

Just then, past the fringes of a large cloud that the wind was driving eastward, the moon appeared.

The surface of the sea glistened under its rays.

That kindly light rekindled our strength.

I held up my head again.

My eyes darted to every point of the horizon.

I spotted the frigate.

It was five miles from us and formed no more than a dark, barely perceptible mass.

But as for longboats, not a one in sight!

I tried to call out.

What was the use at such a distance!

My swollen lips wouldn't let a single sound through.

Conseil could still articulate a few words, and I heard him repeat at intervals: "Help!

Help!"

Ceasing all movement for an instant, we listened.

And it may have been a ringing in my ear, from this organ filling with impeded blood, but it seemed to me that Conseil's shout had received an answer back.

"Did you hear that?"

I muttered.

"Yes, yes!"

And Conseil hurled another desperate plea into space.

This time there could be no mistake!

A human voice had answered us!

Was it the voice of some poor devil left behind in midocean, some other victim of that collision suffered by our ship?

Or was it one of the frigate's longboats, hailing us out of the gloom?

Conseil made one final effort, and bracing his hands on my shoulders, while I offered resistance with one supreme exertion, he raised himself half out of the water, then fell back exhausted.

"What did you see?"

"I saw .

.

.

,"

he muttered, "I saw .

.

.

but we mustn't talk .

.

.

save our strength .

.

.

!"

What had he seen?

Then, lord knows why, the thought of the monster came into my head for the first time .

.

.

!

But even so, that voice .

.

.

?

Gone are the days when Jonahs took refuge in the bellies of whales!

Nevertheless, Conseil kept towing me.

Sometimes he looked up, stared straight ahead, and shouted a request for directions, which was answered by a voice that was getting closer and closer.

I could barely hear it.

I was at the end of my strength; my fingers gave out; my hands were no help to me; my mouth opened convulsively, filling with brine; its coldness ran through me; I raised my head one last time, then I collapsed.

.

.

.

Just then something hard banged against me.

I clung to it.

Then I felt myself being pulled upward, back to the surface of the water; my chest caved in, and I fainted.

.

.

.

For certain, I came to quickly, because someone was massaging me so vigorously it left furrows in my flesh.

I half opened my eyes.

.

.

.

"Conseil!"

I muttered.

"Did master ring for me?"

Conseil replied.

Just then, in the last light of a moon settling on the horizon, I spotted a face that wasn't Conseil's but which I recognized at once.

"Ned!"

I exclaimed.

"In person, sir, and still after his prize!"

the Canadian replied.

"You were thrown overboard after the frigate's collision?"

"Yes, professor, but I was luckier than you, and right away I was able to set foot on this floating islet."

"Islet?"

"Or in other words, on our gigantic narwhale."

"Explain yourself, Ned."

"It's just that I soon realized why my harpoon got blunted and couldn't puncture its hide."

"Why, Ned, why?"

"Because, professor, this beast is made of boilerplate steel!"

At this point in my story, I need to get a grip on myself, reconstruct exactly what I experienced, and make doubly sure of everything I write.

The Canadian's last words caused a sudden upheaval in my brain.

I swiftly hoisted myself to the summit of this half-submerged creature or object that was serving as our refuge.

I tested it with my foot.

Obviously it was some hard, impenetrable substance, not the soft matter that makes up the bodies of our big marine mammals.

But this hard substance could have been a bony carapace, like those that covered some prehistoric animals, and I might have left it at that and classified this monster among such amphibious reptiles as turtles or alligators.

Well, no.

The blackish back supporting me was smooth and polished with no overlapping scales.

On impact, it gave off a metallic sonority, and as incredible as this sounds, it seemed, I swear, to be made of riveted plates.

No doubts were possible!

This animal, this monster, this natural phenomenon that had puzzled the whole scientific world, that had muddled and misled the minds of seamen in both hemispheres, was, there could be no escaping it, an even more astonishing phenomenon-- a phenomenon made by the hand of man.

Even if I had discovered that some fabulous, mythological creature really existed, it wouldn't have given me such a terrific mental jolt.

It's easy enough to accept that prodigious things can come from our Creator.

But to find, all at once, right before your eyes, that the impossible had been mysteriously achieved by man himself: this staggers the mind!

But there was no question now.

We were stretched out on the back of some kind of underwater boat that, as far as I could judge, boasted the shape of an immense steel fish.

Ned Land had clear views on the issue.

Conseil and I could only line up behind him.

"But then,"

I said, "does this contraption contain some sort of locomotive mechanism, and a crew to run it?"

"Apparently,"

the harpooner replied.

"And yet for the three hours I've lived on this floating island, it hasn't shown a sign of life."

"This boat hasn't moved at all?"

"No, Professor Aronnax.

It just rides with the waves, but otherwise it hasn't stirred."

"But we know that it's certainly gifted with great speed.

Now then, since an engine is needed to generate that speed, and a mechanic to run that engine, I conclude: we're saved."

"Humph!"

Ned Land put in, his tone denoting reservations.

Just then, as if to take my side in the argument, a bubbling began astern of this strange submersible--whose drive mechanism was obviously a propeller--and the boat started to move.

We barely had time to hang on to its topside, which emerged about eighty centimeters above water.

Fortunately its speed was not excessive.

"So long as it navigates horizontally,"

Ned Land muttered, "I've no complaints.

But if it gets the urge to dive, I wouldn't give $2.00 for my hide!"

The Canadian might have quoted a much lower price.

So it was imperative to make contact with whatever beings were confined inside the plating of this machine.

I searched its surface for an opening or a hatch, a "manhole,"

to use the official term; but the lines of rivets had been firmly driven into the sheet-iron joins and were straight and uniform.

Moreover, the moon then disappeared and left us in profound darkness.

We had to wait for daylight to find some way of getting inside this underwater boat.

So our salvation lay totally in the hands of the mysterious helmsmen steering this submersible, and if it made a dive, we were done for!

But aside from this occurring, I didn't doubt the possibility of our making contact with them.

In fact, if they didn't produce their own air, they inevitably had to make periodic visits to the surface of the ocean to replenish their oxygen supply.

Hence the need for some opening that put the boat's interior in contact with the atmosphere.

As for any hope of being rescued by Commander Farragut, that had to be renounced completely.

We were being swept westward, and I estimate that our comparatively moderate speed reached twelve miles per hour.

The propeller churned the waves with mathematical regularity, sometimes emerging above the surface and throwing phosphorescent spray to great heights.

Near four o'clock in the morning, the submersible picked up speed.

We could barely cope with this dizzying rush, and the waves battered us at close range.

Fortunately Ned's hands came across a big mooring ring fastened to the topside of this sheet-iron back, and we all held on for dear life.

Finally this long night was over.

My imperfect memories won't let me recall my every impression of it.

A single detail comes back to me.

Several times, during various lulls of wind and sea, I thought I heard indistinct sounds, a sort of elusive harmony produced by distant musical chords.

What was the secret behind this underwater navigating, whose explanation the whole world had sought in vain?

What beings lived inside this strange boat?

What mechanical force allowed it to move about with such prodigious speed?

Daylight appeared.

The morning mists surrounded us, but they soon broke up.

I was about to proceed with a careful examination of the hull, whose topside formed a sort of horizontal platform, when I felt it sinking little by little.

"Oh, damnation!"

Ned Land shouted, stamping his foot on the resonant sheet iron.

"Open up there, you antisocial navigators!"

But it was difficult to make yourself heard above the deafening beats of the propeller.

Fortunately this submerging movement stopped.

From inside the boat, there suddenly came noises of iron fastenings pushed roughly aside.

One of the steel plates flew up, a man appeared, gave a bizarre yell, and instantly disappeared.

A few moments later, eight strapping fellows appeared silently, their faces like masks, and dragged us down into their fearsome machine.

"Mobilis in Mobili"

THIS BRUTALLY EXECUTED capture was carried out with lightning speed.

My companions and I had no time to collect ourselves.

I don't know how they felt about being shoved inside this aquatic prison, but as for me, I was shivering all over.

With whom were we dealing?

Surely with some new breed of pirates, exploiting the sea after their own fashion.

The narrow hatch had barely closed over me when I was surrounded by profound darkness.

Saturated with the outside light, my eyes couldn't make out a thing.

I felt my naked feet clinging to the steps of an iron ladder.

Forcibly seized, Ned Land and Conseil were behind me.

At the foot of the ladder, a door opened and instantly closed behind us with a loud clang.

We were alone.

Where?

I couldn't say, could barely even imagine.

All was darkness, but such utter darkness that after several minutes, my eyes were still unable to catch a single one of those hazy gleams that drift through even the blackest nights.

Meanwhile, furious at these goings on, Ned Land gave free rein to his indignation.

"Damnation!"

he exclaimed.

"These people are about as hospitable as the savages of New Caledonia!

All that's lacking is for them to be cannibals!

I wouldn't be surprised if they were, but believe you me, they won't eat me without my kicking up a protest!"

"Calm yourself, Ned my friend,"

Conseil replied serenely.

"Don't flare up so quickly!

We aren't in a kettle yet!"

"In a kettle, no,"

the Canadian shot back, "but in an oven for sure.

It's dark enough for one.

Luckily my Bowie knife hasn't left me, and I can still see well enough to put it to use.* The first one of these bandits who lays a hand on me--"

*Author's Note: A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americans are forever carrying around.

"Don't be so irritable, Ned,"

I then told the harpooner, "and don't ruin things for us with pointless violence.

Who knows whether they might be listening to us?

Instead, let's try to find out where we are!"

I started moving, groping my way.

After five steps I encountered an iron wall made of riveted boilerplate.

Then, turning around, I bumped into a wooden table next to which several stools had been set.

The floor of this prison lay hidden beneath thick, hempen matting that deadened the sound of footsteps.

Its naked walls didn't reveal any trace of a door or window.

Going around the opposite way, Conseil met up with me, and we returned to the middle of this cabin, which had to be twenty feet long by ten wide.

As for its height, not even Ned Land, with his great stature, was able to determine it.

Half an hour had already gone by without our situation changing, when our eyes were suddenly spirited from utter darkness into blinding light.

Our prison lit up all at once; in other words, it filled with luminescent matter so intense that at first I couldn't stand the brightness of it.

From its glare and whiteness, I recognized the electric glow that had played around this underwater boat like some magnificent phosphorescent phenomenon.

After involuntarily closing my eyes, I reopened them and saw that this luminous force came from a frosted half globe curving out of the cabin's ceiling.

"Finally!

It's light enough to see!"

Ned Land exclaimed, knife in hand, staying on the defensive.

"Yes,"

I replied, then ventured the opposite view.

"But as for our situation, we're still in the dark."

"Master must learn patience,"

said the emotionless Conseil.

This sudden illumination of our cabin enabled me to examine its tiniest details.

It contained only a table and five stools.

Its invisible door must have been hermetically sealed.

Not a sound reached our ears.

Everything seemed dead inside this boat.

Was it in motion, or stationary on the surface of the ocean, or sinking into the depths?

I couldn't tell.

But this luminous globe hadn't been turned on without good reason.

Consequently, I hoped that some crewmen would soon make an appearance.

If you want to consign people to oblivion, you don't light up their dungeons.

I was not mistaken.

Unlocking noises became audible, a door opened, and two men appeared.

One was short and stocky, powerfully muscled, broad shouldered, robust of limbs, the head squat, the hair black and luxuriant, the mustache heavy, the eyes bright and penetrating, and his whole personality stamped with that southern-blooded zest that, in France, typifies the people of Provence.

The philosopher Diderot has very aptly claimed that a man's bearing is the clue to his character, and this stocky little man was certainly a living proof of this claim.

You could sense that his everyday conversation must have been packed with such vivid figures of speech as personification, symbolism, and misplaced modifiers.

But I was never in a position to verify this because, around me, he used only an odd and utterly incomprehensible dialect.

The second stranger deserves a more detailed description.

A disciple of such character-judging anatomists as Gratiolet or Engel could have read this man's features like an open book.

Without hesitation, I identified his dominant qualities-- self-confidence, since his head reared like a nobleman's above the arc formed by the lines of his shoulders, and his black eyes gazed with icy assurance; calmness, since his skin, pale rather than ruddy, indicated tranquility of blood; energy, shown by the swiftly knitting muscles of his brow; and finally courage, since his deep breathing denoted tremendous reserves of vitality.

I might add that this was a man of great pride, that his calm, firm gaze seemed to reflect thinking on an elevated plane, and that the harmony of his facial expressions and bodily movements resulted in an overall effect of unquestionable candor-- according to the findings of physiognomists, those analysts of facial character.

I felt "involuntarily reassured"

in his presence, and this boded well for our interview.

Whether this individual was thirty-five or fifty years of age, I could not precisely state.

He was tall, his forehead broad, his nose straight, his mouth clearly etched, his teeth magnificent, his hands refined, tapered, and to use a word from palmistry, highly "psychic,"

in other words, worthy of serving a lofty and passionate spirit.

This man was certainly the most wonderful physical specimen I had ever encountered.

One unusual detail: his eyes were spaced a little far from each other and could instantly take in nearly a quarter of the horizon.

This ability-- as I later verified--was strengthened by a range of vision even greater than Ned Land's.

When this stranger focused his gaze on an object, his eyebrow lines gathered into a frown, his heavy eyelids closed around his pupils to contract his huge field of vision, and he looked!

What a look--as if he could magnify objects shrinking into the distance; as if he could probe your very soul; as if he could pierce those sheets of water so opaque to our eyes and scan the deepest seas .

.

.

!

Wearing caps made of sea-otter fur, and shod in sealskin fishing boots, these two strangers were dressed in clothing made from some unique fabric that flattered the figure and allowed great freedom of movement.

The taller of the two--apparently the leader on board--examined us with the greatest care but without pronouncing a word.

Then, turning to his companion, he conversed with him in a language I didn't recognize.

It was a sonorous, harmonious, flexible dialect whose vowels seemed to undergo a highly varied accentuation.

The other replied with a shake of the head and added two or three utterly incomprehensible words.

Then he seemed to question me directly with a long stare.

I replied in clear French that I wasn't familiar with his language; but he didn't seem to understand me, and the situation grew rather baffling.

"Still, master should tell our story,"

Conseil said to me.

"Perhaps these gentlemen will grasp a few words of it!"

I tried again, telling the tale of our adventures, clearly articulating my every syllable, and not leaving out a single detail.

I stated our names and titles; then, in order, I introduced Professor Aronnax, his manservant Conseil, and Mr.

Ned Land, harpooner.

The man with calm, gentle eyes listened to me serenely, even courteously, and paid remarkable attention.

But nothing in his facial expression indicated that he understood my story.

When I finished, he didn't pronounce a single word.

One resource still left was to speak English.

Perhaps they would be familiar with this nearly universal language.

But I only knew it, as I did the German language, well enough to read it fluently, not well enough to speak it correctly.

Here, however, our overriding need was to make ourselves understood.

"Come on, it's your turn,"

I told the harpooner.

"Over to you, Mr.

Land.

Pull out of your bag of tricks the best English ever spoken by an Anglo-Saxon, and try for a more favorable result than mine."

Ned needed no persuading and started our story all over again, most of which I could follow.

Its content was the same, but the form differed.

Carried away by his volatile temperament, the Canadian put great animation into it.

He complained vehemently about being imprisoned in defiance of his civil rights, asked by virtue of which law he was hereby detained, invoked writs of habeas corpus, threatened to press charges against anyone holding him in illegal custody, ranted, gesticulated, shouted, and finally conveyed by an expressive gesture that we were dying of hunger.

This was perfectly true, but we had nearly forgotten the fact.

Much to his amazement, the harpooner seemed no more intelligible than I had been.

Our visitors didn't bat an eye.

Apparently they were engineers who understood the languages of neither the French physicist Arago nor the English physicist Faraday.

Thoroughly baffled after vainly exhausting our philological resources, I no longer knew what tactic to pursue, when Conseil told me: "If master will authorize me, I'll tell the whole business in German."

"What!

You know German?"

I exclaimed.

"Like most Flemish people, with all due respect to master."

"On the contrary, my respect is due you.

Go to it, my boy."

And Conseil, in his serene voice, described for the third time the various vicissitudes of our story.

But despite our narrator's fine accent and stylish turns of phrase, the German language met with no success.

Finally, as a last resort, I hauled out everything I could remember from my early schooldays, and I tried to narrate our adventures in Latin.

Cicero would have plugged his ears and sent me to the scullery, but somehow I managed to pull through.

With the same negative result.

This last attempt ultimately misfiring, the two strangers exchanged a few words in their incomprehensible language and withdrew, not even favoring us with one of those encouraging gestures that are used in every country in the world.

The door closed again.

"This is outrageous!"

Ned Land shouted, exploding for the twentieth time.

"I ask you!

We speak French, English, German, and Latin to these rogues, and neither of them has the decency to even answer back!"

"Calm down, Ned,"

I told the seething harpooner.

"Anger won't get us anywhere."

"But professor,"

our irascible companion went on, "can't you see that we could die of hunger in this iron cage?"

"Bah!"

Conseil put in philosophically.

"We can hold out a good while yet!"

"My friends,"

I said, "we mustn't despair.

We've gotten out of tighter spots.

So please do me the favor of waiting a bit before you form your views on the commander and crew of this boat."

"My views are fully formed,"

Ned Land shot back.

"They're rogues!"

"Oh good!

And from what country?"

"Roguedom!"

"My gallant Ned, as yet that country isn't clearly marked on maps of the world, but I admit that the nationality of these two strangers is hard to make out!

Neither English, French, nor German, that's all we can say.

But I'm tempted to think that the commander and his chief officer were born in the low latitudes.

There must be southern blood in them.

But as to whether they're Spaniards, Turks, Arabs, or East Indians, their physical characteristics don't give me enough to go on.

And as for their speech, it's utterly incomprehensible."

"That's the nuisance in not knowing every language,"

Conseil replied, "or the drawback in not having one universal language!"

"Which would all go out the window!"

Ned Land replied.

"Don't you see, these people have a language all to themselves, a language they've invented just to cause despair in decent people who ask for a little dinner!

Why, in every country on earth, when you open your mouth, snap your jaws, smack your lips and teeth, isn't that the world's most understandable message?

From Quebec to the Tuamotu Islands, from Paris to the Antipodes, doesn't it mean: I'm hungry, give me a bite to eat!"

"Oh,"

Conseil put in, "there are some people so unintelligent by nature .

.

."

As he was saying these words, the door opened.

A steward entered.* He brought us some clothes, jackets and sailor's pants, made out of a fabric whose nature I didn't recognize.

I hurried to change into them, and my companions followed suit.

*Author's Note: A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.

Meanwhile our silent steward, perhaps a deaf-mute, set the table and laid three place settings.

"There's something serious afoot,"

Conseil said, "and it bodes well."

"Bah!"

replied the rancorous harpooner.

"What the devil do you suppose they eat around here?

Turtle livers, loin of shark, dogfish steaks?"

"We'll soon find out!"

Conseil said.

Overlaid with silver dish covers, various platters had been neatly positioned on the table cloth, and we sat down to eat.

Assuredly, we were dealing with civilized people, and if it hadn't been for this electric light flooding over us, I would have thought we were in the dining room of the Hotel Adelphi in Liverpool, or the Grand Hotel in Paris.

However, I feel compelled to mention that bread and wine were totally absent.

The water was fresh and clear, but it was still water--which wasn't what Ned Land had in mind.

Among the foods we were served, I was able to identify various daintily dressed fish; but I couldn't make up my mind about certain otherwise excellent dishes, and I couldn't even tell whether their contents belonged to the vegetable or the animal kingdom.

As for the tableware, it was elegant and in perfect taste.

Each utensil, spoon, fork, knife, and plate, bore on its reverse a letter encircled by a Latin motto, and here is its exact duplicate: MOBILIS IN MOBILI N Moving within the moving element!

It was a highly appropriate motto for this underwater machine, so long as the preposition in is translated as within and not upon.

The letter N was no doubt the initial of the name of that mystifying individual in command beneath the seas!

Ned and Conseil had no time for such musings.

They were wolfing down their food, and without further ado I did the same.

By now I felt reassured about our fate, and it seemed obvious that our hosts didn't intend to let us die of starvation.

But all earthly things come to an end, all things must pass, even the hunger of people who haven't eaten for fifteen hours.

Our appetites appeased, we felt an urgent need for sleep.

A natural reaction after that interminable night of fighting for our lives.

"Ye gods, I'll sleep soundly,"

Conseil said.

"Me, I'm out like a light!"

Ned Land replied.

My two companions lay down on the cabin's carpeting and were soon deep in slumber.

As for me, I gave in less readily to this intense need for sleep.

Too many thoughts had piled up in my mind, too many insoluble questions had arisen, too many images were keeping my eyelids open!

Where were we?

What strange power was carrying us along?

I felt--or at least I thought I did--the submersible sinking toward the sea's lower strata.

Intense nightmares besieged me.

In these mysterious marine sanctuaries, I envisioned hosts of unknown animals, and this underwater boat seemed to be a blood relation of theirs: living, breathing, just as fearsome .

.

.

!

Then my mind grew calmer, my imagination melted into hazy drowsiness, and I soon fell into an uneasy slumber.

The Tantrums of Ned Land I HAVE NO IDEA how long this slumber lasted; but it must have been a good while, since we were completely over our exhaustion.

I was the first one to wake up.

My companions weren't yet stirring and still lay in their corners like inanimate objects.

I had barely gotten up from my passably hard mattress when I felt my mind clear, my brain go on the alert.

So I began a careful reexamination of our cell.

Nothing had changed in its interior arrangements.

The prison was still a prison and its prisoners still prisoners.

But, taking advantage of our slumber, the steward had cleared the table.

Consequently, nothing indicated any forthcoming improvement in our situation, and I seriously wondered if we were doomed to spend the rest of our lives in this cage.

This prospect seemed increasingly painful to me because, even though my brain was clear of its obsessions from the night before, I was feeling an odd short-windedness in my chest.

It was becoming hard for me to breathe.

The heavy air was no longer sufficient for the full play of my lungs.

Although our cell was large, we obviously had used up most of the oxygen it contained.

In essence, over an hour's time a single human being consumes all the oxygen found in 100 liters of air, at which point that air has become charged with a nearly equal amount of carbon dioxide and is no longer fit for breathing.

So it was now urgent to renew the air in our prison, and no doubt the air in this whole underwater boat as well.

Here a question popped into my head.

How did the commander of this aquatic residence go about it?

Did he obtain air using chemical methods, releasing the oxygen contained in potassium chlorate by heating it, meanwhile absorbing the carbon dioxide with potassium hydroxide?

If so, he would have to keep up some kind of relationship with the shore, to come by the materials needed for such an operation.

Did he simply limit himself to storing the air in high-pressure tanks and then dispense it according to his crew's needs?

Perhaps.

Or, proceeding in a more convenient, more economical, and consequently more probable fashion, was he satisfied with merely returning to breathe at the surface of the water like a cetacean, renewing his oxygen supply every twenty-four hours?

In any event, whatever his method was, it seemed prudent to me that he use this method without delay.

In fact, I had already resorted to speeding up my inhalations in order to extract from the cell what little oxygen it contained, when suddenly I was refreshed by a current of clean air, scented with a salty aroma.

It had to be a sea breeze, life-giving and charged with iodine!

I opened my mouth wide, and my lungs glutted themselves on the fresh particles.

At the same time, I felt a swaying, a rolling of moderate magnitude but definitely noticeable.

This boat, this sheet-iron monster, had obviously just risen to the surface of the ocean, there to breathe in good whale fashion.

So the ship's mode of ventilation was finally established.

When I had absorbed a chestful of this clean air, I looked for the conduit--the "air carrier,"

if you prefer--that allowed this beneficial influx to reach us, and I soon found it.

Above the door opened an air vent that let in a fresh current of oxygen, renewing the thin air in our cell.

I had gotten to this point in my observations when Ned and Conseil woke up almost simultaneously, under the influence of this reviving air purification.

They rubbed their eyes, stretched their arms, and sprang to their feet.

"Did master sleep well?"

Conseil asked me with his perennial good manners.

"Extremely well, my gallant lad,"

I replied.

"And how about you, Mr.

Ned Land?"

"Like a log, professor.

But I must be imagining things, because it seems like I'm breathing a sea breeze!"

A seaman couldn't be wrong on this topic, and I told the Canadian what had gone on while he slept.

"Good!"

he said.

"That explains perfectly all that bellowing we heard, when our so-called narwhale lay in sight of the Abraham Lincoln."

"Perfectly, Mr.

Land.

It was catching its breath!"

"Only I've no idea what time it is, Professor Aronnax, unless maybe it's dinnertime?"

"Dinnertime, my fine harpooner?

I'd say at least breakfast time, because we've certainly woken up to a new day."

"Which indicates,"

Conseil replied, "that we've spent twenty-four hours in slumber."

"That's my assessment,"

I replied.

"I won't argue with you,"

Ned Land answered.

"But dinner or breakfast, that steward will be plenty welcome whether he brings the one or the other."

"The one and the other,"

Conseil said.

"Well put,"

the Canadian replied.

"We deserve two meals, and speaking for myself, I'll do justice to them both."

"All right, Ned, let's wait and see!"

I replied.

"It's clear that these strangers don't intend to let us die of hunger, otherwise last evening's dinner wouldn't make any sense."

"Unless they're fattening us up!"

Ned shot back.

"I object,"

I replied.

"We have not fallen into the hands of cannibals."

"Just because they don't make a habit of it,"

the Canadian replied in all seriousness, "doesn't mean they don't indulge from time to time.

Who knows?

Maybe these people have gone without fresh meat for a long while, and in that case three healthy, well-built specimens like the professor, his manservant, and me ---"

"Get rid of those ideas, Mr.

Land,"

I answered the harpooner.

"And above all, don't let them lead you to flare up against our hosts, which would only make our situation worse."

"Anyhow,"

the harpooner said, "I'm as hungry as all Hades, and dinner or breakfast, not one puny meal has arrived!"

"Mr.

Land,"

I answered, "we have to adapt to the schedule on board, and I imagine our stomachs are running ahead of the chief cook's dinner bell."

"Well then, we'll adjust our stomachs to the chef's timetable!"

Conseil replied serenely.

"There you go again, Conseil my friend!"

the impatient Canadian shot back.

"You never allow yourself any displays of bile or attacks of nerves!

You're everlastingly calm!

You'd say your after-meal grace even if you didn't get any food for your before-meal blessing-- and you'd starve to death rather than complain!"

"What good would it do?"

Conseil asked.

"Complaining doesn't have to do good, it just feels good!

And if these pirates--I say pirates out of consideration for the professor's feelings, since he doesn't want us to call them cannibals-- if these pirates think they're going to smother me in this cage without hearing what cusswords spice up my outbursts, they've got another think coming!

Look here, Professor Aronnax, speak frankly.

How long do you figure they'll keep us in this iron box?"

"To tell the truth, friend Land, I know little more about it than you do."

"But in a nutshell, what do you suppose is going on?"

"My supposition is that sheer chance has made us privy to an important secret.

Now then, if the crew of this underwater boat have a personal interest in keeping that secret, and if their personal interest is more important than the lives of three men, I believe that our very existence is in jeopardy.

If such is not the case, then at the first available opportunity, this monster that has swallowed us will return us to the world inhabited by our own kind."

"Unless they recruit us to serve on the crew,"

Conseil said, "and keep us here--"

"Till the moment,"

Ned Land answered, "when some frigate that's faster or smarter than the Abraham Lincoln captures this den of buccaneers, then hangs all of us by the neck from the tip of a mainmast yardarm!"

"Well thought out, Mr.

Land,"

I replied.

"But as yet, I don't believe we've been tendered any enlistment offers.

Consequently, it's pointless to argue about what tactics we should pursue in such a case.

I repeat: let's wait, let's be guided by events, and let's do nothing, since right now there's nothing we can do."

"On the contrary, professor,"

the harpooner replied, not wanting to give in.

"There is something we can do."

"Oh?

And what, Mr.

Land?"

"Break out of here!"

"Breaking out of a prison on shore is difficult enough, but with an underwater prison, it strikes me as completely unworkable."

"Come now, Ned my friend,"

Conseil asked, "how would you answer master's objection?

I refuse to believe that an American is at the end of his tether."

Visibly baffled, the harpooner said nothing.

Under the conditions in which fate had left us, it was absolutely impossible to escape.

But a Canadian's wit is half French, and Mr.

Ned Land made this clear in his reply.

"So, Professor Aronnax,"

he went on after thinking for a few moments, "you haven't figured out what people do when they can't escape from their prison?"

"No, my friend."

"Easy.

They fix things so they stay there."

"Of course!"

Conseil put in.

"Since we're deep in the ocean, being inside this boat is vastly preferable to being above it or below it!"

"But we fix things by kicking out all the jailers, guards, and wardens,"

Ned Land added.

"What's this, Ned?"

I asked.

"You'd seriously consider taking over this craft?"

"Very seriously,"

the Canadian replied.

"It's impossible."

"And why is that, sir?

Some promising opportunity might come up, and I don't see what could stop us from taking advantage of it.

If there are only about twenty men on board this machine, I don't think they can stave off two Frenchmen and a Canadian!"

It seemed wiser to accept the harpooner's proposition than to debate it.

Accordingly, I was content to reply: "Let such circumstances come, Mr.

Land, and we'll see.

But until then, I beg you to control your impatience.

We need to act shrewdly, and your flare-ups won't give rise to any promising opportunities.

So swear to me that you'll accept our situation without throwing a tantrum over it."

"I give you my word, professor,"

Ned Land replied in an unenthusiastic tone.

"No vehement phrases will leave my mouth, no vicious gestures will give my feelings away, not even when they don't feed us on time."

"I have your word, Ned,"

I answered the Canadian.

Then our conversation petered out, and each of us withdrew into his own thoughts.

For my part, despite the harpooner's confident talk, I admit that I entertained no illusions.

I had no faith in those promising opportunities that Ned Land mentioned.

To operate with such efficiency, this underwater boat had to have a sizeable crew, so if it came to a physical contest, we would be facing an overwhelming opponent.

Besides, before we could do anything, we had to be free, and that we definitely were not.

I didn't see any way out of this sheet-iron, hermetically sealed cell.

And if the strange commander of this boat did have a secret to keep-- which seemed rather likely--he would never give us freedom of movement aboard his vessel.

Now then, would he resort to violence in order to be rid of us, or would he drop us off one day on some remote coast?

There lay the unknown.

All these hypotheses seemed extremely plausible to me, and to hope for freedom through use of force, you had to be a harpooner.

I realized, moreover, that Ned Land's brooding was getting him madder by the minute.

Little by little, I heard those aforesaid cusswords welling up in the depths of his gullet, and I saw his movements turn threatening again.

He stood up, pacing in circles like a wild beast in a cage, striking the walls with his foot and fist.

Meanwhile the hours passed, our hunger nagged unmercifully, and this time the steward did not appear.

Which amounted to forgetting our castaway status for much too long, if they really had good intentions toward us.

Tortured by the growling of his well-built stomach, Ned Land was getting more and more riled, and despite his word of honor, I was in real dread of an explosion when he stood in the presence of one of the men on board.

For two more hours Ned Land's rage increased.

The Canadian shouted and pleaded, but to no avail.

The sheet-iron walls were deaf.

I didn't hear a single sound inside this dead-seeming boat.

The vessel hadn't stirred, because I obviously would have felt its hull vibrating under the influence of the propeller.

It had undoubtedly sunk into the watery deep and no longer belonged to the outside world.

All this dismal silence was terrifying.

As for our neglect, our isolation in the depths of this cell, I was afraid to guess at how long it might last.

Little by little, hopes I had entertained after our interview with the ship's commander were fading away.

The gentleness of the man's gaze, the generosity expressed in his facial features, the nobility of his bearing, all vanished from my memory.

I saw this mystifying individual anew for what he inevitably must be: cruel and merciless.

I viewed him as outside humanity, beyond all feelings of compassion, the implacable foe of his fellow man, toward whom he must have sworn an undying hate!

But even so, was the man going to let us die of starvation, locked up in this cramped prison, exposed to those horrible temptations to which people are driven by extreme hunger?

This grim possibility took on a dreadful intensity in my mind, and fired by my imagination, I felt an unreasoning terror run through me.

Conseil stayed calm.

Ned Land bellowed.

Just then a noise was audible outside.

Footsteps rang on the metal tiling.

The locks were turned, the door opened, the steward appeared.

Before I could make a single movement to prevent him, the Canadian rushed at the poor man, threw him down, held him by the throat.

The steward was choking in the grip of those powerful hands.

Conseil was already trying to loosen the harpooner's hands from his half-suffocated victim, and I had gone to join in the rescue, when I was abruptly nailed to the spot by these words pronounced in French: "Calm down, Mr.

Land!

And you, professor, kindly listen to me!"

The Man of the Waters IT WAS THE ship's commander who had just spoken.

At these words Ned Land stood up quickly.

Nearly strangled, the steward staggered out at a signal from his superior; but such was the commander's authority aboard his vessel, not one gesture gave away the resentment that this man must have felt toward the Canadian.

In silence we waited for the outcome of this scene; Conseil, in spite of himself, seemed almost fascinated, I was stunned.

Arms crossed, leaning against a corner of the table, the commander studied us with great care.

Was he reluctant to speak further?

Did he regret those words he had just pronounced in French?

You would have thought so.

After a few moments of silence, which none of us would have dreamed of interrupting: "Gentlemen,"

he said in a calm, penetrating voice, "I speak French, English, German, and Latin with equal fluency.

Hence I could have answered you as early as our initial interview, but first I wanted to make your acquaintance and then think things over.

Your four versions of the same narrative, perfectly consistent by and large, established your personal identities for me.

I now know that sheer chance has placed in my presence Professor Pierre Aronnax, specialist in natural history at the Paris Museum and entrusted with a scientific mission abroad, his manservant Conseil, and Ned Land, a harpooner of Canadian origin aboard the Abraham Lincoln, a frigate in the national navy of the United States of America."

I bowed in agreement.

The commander hadn't put a question to me.

So no answer was called for.

This man expressed himself with perfect ease and without a trace of an accent.

His phrasing was clear, his words well chosen, his facility in elocution remarkable.

And yet, to me, he didn't have "the feel"

of a fellow countryman.

He went on with the conversation as follows: "No doubt, sir, you've felt that I waited rather too long before paying you this second visit.

After discovering your identities, I wanted to weigh carefully what policy to pursue toward you.

I had great difficulty deciding.

Some extremely inconvenient circumstances have brought you into the presence of a man who has cut himself off from humanity.

Your coming has disrupted my whole existence."

"Unintentionally,"

I said.

"Unintentionally?"

the stranger replied, raising his voice a little.

"Was it unintentionally that the Abraham Lincoln hunted me on every sea?

Was it unintentionally that you traveled aboard that frigate?

Was it unintentionally that your shells bounced off my ship's hull?

Was it unintentionally that Mr.

Ned Land hit me with his harpoon?"

I detected a controlled irritation in these words.

But there was a perfectly natural reply to these charges, and I made it.

"Sir,"

I said, "you're surely unaware of the discussions that have taken place in Europe and America with yourself as the subject.

You don't realize that various accidents, caused by collisions with your underwater machine, have aroused public passions on those two continents.

I'll spare you the innumerable hypotheses with which we've tried to explain this inexplicable phenomenon, whose secret is yours alone.

But please understand that the Abraham Lincoln chased you over the Pacific high seas in the belief it was hunting some powerful marine monster, which had to be purged from the ocean at all cost."

A half smile curled the commander's lips; then, in a calmer tone: "Professor Aronnax,"

he replied, "do you dare claim that your frigate wouldn't have chased and cannonaded an underwater boat as readily as a monster?"

This question baffled me, since Commander Farragut would certainly have shown no such hesitation.

He would have seen it as his sworn duty to destroy a contrivance of this kind just as promptly as a gigantic narwhale.

"So you understand, sir,"

the stranger went on, "that I have a right to treat you as my enemy."

I kept quiet, with good reason.

What was the use of debating such a proposition, when superior force can wipe out the best arguments?

"It took me a good while to decide,"

the commander went on.

with you, I'd have no personal interest in ever seeing you again.

I could put you back on the platform of this ship that has served as your refuge.

I could sink under the sea, and I could forget you ever existed.

Wouldn't that be my right?"

"Perhaps it would be the right of a savage,"

I replied.

"But not that of a civilized man."

"Professor,"

the commander replied swiftly, "I'm not what you term a civilized man!

I've severed all ties with society, for reasons that I alone have the right to appreciate.

Therefore I obey none of its regulations, and I insist that you never invoke them in front of me!"

This was plain speaking.

A flash of anger and scorn lit up the stranger's eyes, and I glimpsed a fearsome past in this man's life.

Not only had he placed himself beyond human laws, he had rendered himself independent, out of all reach, free in the strictest sense of the word!

For who would dare chase him to the depths of the sea when he thwarted all attacks on the surface?

What ship could withstand a collision with his underwater Monitor?

What armor plate, no matter how heavy, could bear the thrusts of his spur?

No man among men could call him to account for his actions.

God, if he believed in Him, his conscience if he had one-- these were the only judges to whom he was answerable.

These thoughts swiftly crossed my mind while this strange individual fell silent, like someone completely self-absorbed.

I regarded him with a mixture of fear and fascination, in the same way, no doubt, that Oedipus regarded the Sphinx.

After a fairly long silence, the commander went on with our conversation.

"So I had difficulty deciding,"

he said.

"But I concluded that my personal interests could be reconciled with that natural compassion to which every human being has a right.

Since fate has brought you here, you'll stay aboard my vessel.

You'll be free here, and in exchange for that freedom, moreover totally related to it, I'll lay on you just one condition.

Your word that you'll submit to it will be sufficient."

"Go on, sir,"

I replied.

"I assume this condition is one an honest man can accept?"

"Yes, sir.

Just this.

It's possible that certain unforeseen events may force me to confine you to your cabins for some hours, or even for some days as the case may be.

Since I prefer never to use violence, I expect from you in such a case, even more than in any other, your unquestioning obedience.

By acting in this way, I shield you from complicity, I absolve you of all responsibility, since I myself make it impossible for you to see what you aren't meant to see.

Do you accept this condition?"

So things happened on board that were quite odd to say the least, things never to be seen by people not placing themselves beyond society's laws!

Among all the surprises the future had in store for me, this would not be the mildest.

"We accept,"

I replied.

"Only, I'll ask your permission, sir, to address a question to you, just one."

"Go ahead, sir."

"You said we'd be free aboard your vessel?"

"Completely."

"Then I would ask what you mean by this freedom."

"Why, the freedom to come, go, see, and even closely observe everything happening here--except under certain rare circumstances-- in short, the freedom we ourselves enjoy, my companions and I."

It was obvious that we did not understand each other.

"Pardon me, sir,"

I went on, "but that's merely the freedom that every prisoner has, the freedom to pace his cell!

That's not enough for us."

"Nevertheless, it will have to do!"

"What!

We must give up seeing our homeland, friends, and relatives ever again?"

"Yes, sir.

But giving up that intolerable earthly yoke that some men call freedom is perhaps less painful than you think!"

"By thunder!"

Ned Land shouted.

"I'll never promise I won't try getting out of here!"

"I didn't ask for such a promise, Mr.

Land,"

the commander replied coldly.

"Sir,"

I replied, flaring up in spite of myself, "you're taking unfair advantage of us!

This is sheer cruelty!"

"No, sir, it's an act of mercy!

You're my prisoners of war!

I've cared for you when, with a single word, I could plunge you back into the ocean depths!

You attacked me!

You've just stumbled on a secret no living man must probe, the secret of my entire existence!

Do you think I'll send you back to a world that must know nothing more of me?

Never!

By keeping you on board, it isn't you whom I care for, it's me!"

These words indicated that the commander pursued a policy impervious to arguments.

"Then, sir,"

I went on, "you give us, quite simply, a choice between life and death?"

"Quite simply."

"My friends,"

I said, "to a question couched in these terms, our answer can be taken for granted.

But no solemn promises bind us to the commander of this vessel."

"None, sir,"

the stranger replied.

Then, in a gentler voice, he went on: "Now, allow me to finish what I have to tell you.

I've heard of you, Professor Aronnax.

You, if not your companions, won't perhaps complain too much about the stroke of fate that has brought us together.

Among the books that make up my favorite reading, you'll find the work you've published on the great ocean depths.

I've pored over it.

You've taken your studies as far as terrestrial science can go.

But you don't know everything because you haven't seen everything.

Let me tell you, professor, you won't regret the time you spend aboard my vessel.

You're going to voyage through a land of wonders.

Stunned amazement will probably be your habitual state of mind.

It will be a long while before you tire of the sights constantly before your eyes.

I'm going to make another underwater tour of the world-- perhaps my last, who knows?--and I'll review everything I've studied in the depths of these seas that I've crossed so often, and you can be my fellow student.

Starting this very day, you'll enter a new element, you'll see what no human being has ever seen before-- since my men and I no longer count--and thanks to me, you're going to learn the ultimate secrets of our planet."

I can't deny it; the commander's words had a tremendous effect on me.

He had caught me on my weak side, and I momentarily forgot that not even this sublime experience was worth the loss of my freedom.

Besides, I counted on the future to resolve this important question.

So I was content to reply: "Sir, even though you've cut yourself off from humanity, I can see that you haven't disowned all human feeling.

We're castaways whom you've charitably taken aboard, we'll never forget that.

Speaking for myself, I don't rule out that the interests of science could override even the need for freedom, which promises me that, in exchange, our encounter will provide great rewards."

I thought the commander would offer me his hand, to seal our agreement.

He did nothing of the sort.

I regretted that.

"One last question,"

I said, just as this inexplicable being seemed ready to withdraw.

"Ask it, professor."

"By what name am I to call you?"

"Sir,"

the commander replied, "to you, I'm simply Captain Nemo;* to me, you and your companions are simply passengers on the Nautilus."

*Latin: nemo means "no one."

Ed.

Captain Nemo called out.

A steward appeared.

The captain gave him his orders in that strange language I couldn't even identify.

Then, turning to the Canadian and Conseil: "A meal is waiting for you in your cabin,"

he told them.

"Kindly follow this man."

"That's an offer I can't refuse!"

the harpooner replied.

After being confined for over thirty hours, he and Conseil were finally out of this cell.

"And now, Professor Aronnax, our own breakfast is ready.

Allow me to lead the way."

"Yours to command, captain."

I followed Captain Nemo, and as soon as I passed through the doorway, I went down a kind of electrically lit passageway that resembled a gangway on a ship.

After a stretch of some ten meters, a second door opened before me.

I then entered a dining room, decorated and furnished in austere good taste.

Inlaid with ebony trim, tall oaken sideboards stood at both ends of this room, and sparkling on their shelves were staggered rows of earthenware, porcelain, and glass of incalculable value.

There silver-plated dinnerware gleamed under rays pouring from light fixtures in the ceiling, whose glare was softened and tempered by delicately painted designs.

In the center of this room stood a table, richly spread.

Captain Nemo indicated the place I was to occupy.

"Be seated,"

he told me, "and eat like the famished man you must be."

Our breakfast consisted of several dishes whose contents were all supplied by the sea, and some foods whose nature and derivation were unknown to me.

They were good, I admit, but with a peculiar flavor to which I would soon grow accustomed.

These various food items seemed to be rich in phosphorous, and I thought that they, too, must have been of marine origin.

Captain Nemo stared at me.

I had asked him nothing, but he read my thoughts, and on his own he answered the questions I was itching to address him.

"Most of these dishes are new to you,"

he told me.

"But you can consume them without fear.

They're healthy and nourishing.

I renounced terrestrial foods long ago, and I'm none the worse for it.

My crew are strong and full of energy, and they eat what I eat."

"So,"

I said, "all these foods are products of the sea?"

"Yes, professor, the sea supplies all my needs.

Sometimes I cast my nets in our wake, and I pull them up ready to burst.

Sometimes I go hunting right in the midst of this element that has long seemed so far out of man's reach, and I corner the game that dwells in my underwater forests.

Like the flocks of old Proteus, King Neptune's shepherd, my herds graze without fear on the ocean's immense prairies.

There I own vast properties that I harvest myself, and which are forever sown by the hand of the Creator of All Things."

I stared at Captain Nemo in definite astonishment, and I answered him: "Sir, I understand perfectly how your nets can furnish excellent fish for your table; I understand less how you can chase aquatic game in your underwater forests; but how a piece of red meat, no matter how small, can figure in your menu, that I don't understand at all."

"Nor I, sir,"

Captain Nemo answered me.

"I never touch the flesh of land animals."

"Nevertheless, this .

.

.

,"

I went on, pointing to a dish where some slices of loin were still left.

"What you believe to be red meat, professor, is nothing other than loin of sea turtle.

Similarly, here are some dolphin livers you might mistake for stewed pork.

My chef is a skillful food processor who excels at pickling and preserving these various exhibits from the ocean.

Feel free to sample all of these foods.

Here are some preserves of sea cucumber that a Malaysian would declare to be unrivaled in the entire world, here's cream from milk furnished by the udders of cetaceans, and sugar from the huge fucus plants in the North Sea; and finally, allow me to offer you some marmalade of sea anemone, equal to that from the tastiest fruits."

So I sampled away, more as a curiosity seeker than an epicure, while Captain Nemo delighted me with his incredible anecdotes.

"But this sea, Professor Aronnax,"

he told me, "this prodigious, inexhaustible wet nurse of a sea not only feeds me, she dresses me as well.

That fabric covering you was woven from the masses of filaments that anchor certain seashells; as the ancients were wont to do, it was dyed with purple ink from the murex snail and shaded with violet tints that I extract from a marine slug, the Mediterranean sea hare.

The perfumes you'll find on the washstand in your cabin were produced from the oozings of marine plants.

Your mattress was made from the ocean's softest eelgrass.

Your quill pen will be whalebone, your ink a juice secreted by cuttlefish or squid.

Everything comes to me from the sea, just as someday everything will return to it!"

"You love the sea, captain."

"Yes, I love it!

The sea is the be all and end all!

It covers seven-tenths of the planet earth.

Its breath is clean and healthy.

It's an immense wilderness where a man is never lonely, because he feels life astir on every side.

The sea is simply the vehicle for a prodigious, unearthly mode of existence; it's simply movement and love; it's living infinity, as one of your poets put it.

And in essence, professor, nature is here made manifest by all three of her kingdoms, mineral, vegetable, and animal.

The last of these is amply represented by the four zoophyte groups, three classes of articulates, five classes of mollusks, and three vertebrate classes: mammals, reptiles, and those countless legions of fish, an infinite order of animals totaling more than 13,000 species, of which only one-tenth belong to fresh water.

The sea is a vast pool of nature.

Our globe began with the sea, so to speak, and who can say we won't end with it!

Here lies supreme tranquility.

The sea doesn't belong to tyrants.

On its surface they can still exercise their iniquitous claims, battle each other, devour each other, haul every earthly horror.

But thirty feet below sea level, their dominion ceases, their influence fades, their power vanishes!

Ah, sir, live!

Live in the heart of the seas!

Here alone lies independence!

Here I recognize no superiors!

Here I'm free!"

Captain Nemo suddenly fell silent in the midst of this enthusiastic outpouring.

Had he let himself get carried away, past the bounds of his habitual reserve?

Had he said too much?

For a few moments he strolled up and down, all aquiver.

Then his nerves grew calmer, his facial features recovered their usual icy composure, and turning to me: "Now, professor,"

he said, "if you'd like to inspect the Nautilus, I'm yours to command."

The Nautilus CAPTAIN NEMO stood up.

I followed him.

Contrived at the rear of the dining room, a double door opened, and I entered a room whose dimensions equaled the one I had just left.

It was a library.

Tall, black-rosewood bookcases, inlaid with copperwork, held on their wide shelves a large number of uniformly bound books.

These furnishings followed the contours of the room, their lower parts leading to huge couches upholstered in maroon leather and curved for maximum comfort.

Light, movable reading stands, which could be pushed away or pulled near as desired, allowed books to be positioned on them for easy study.

In the center stood a huge table covered with pamphlets, among which some newspapers, long out of date, were visible.

Electric light flooded this whole harmonious totality, falling from four frosted half globes set in the scrollwork of the ceiling.

I stared in genuine wonderment at this room so ingeniously laid out, and I couldn't believe my eyes.

"Captain Nemo,"

I told my host, who had just stretched out on a couch, "this is a library that would do credit to more than one continental palace, and I truly marvel to think it can go with you into the deepest seas."

"Where could one find greater silence or solitude, professor?"

Captain Nemo replied.

"Did your study at the museum afford you such a perfect retreat?"

"No, sir, and I might add that it's quite a humble one next to yours.

You own 6,000 or 7,000 volumes here .

.

."

"12,000, Professor Aronnax.

They're my sole remaining ties with dry land.

But I was done with the shore the day my Nautilus submerged for the first time under the waters.

That day I purchased my last volumes, my last pamphlets, my last newspapers, and ever since I've chosen to believe that humanity no longer thinks or writes.

In any event, professor, these books are at your disposal, and you may use them freely."

I thanked Captain Nemo and approached the shelves of this library.

Written in every language, books on science, ethics, and literature were there in abundance, but I didn't see a single work on economics-- they seemed to be strictly banned on board.

One odd detail: all these books were shelved indiscriminately without regard to the language in which they were written, and this jumble proved that the Nautilus's captain could read fluently whatever volumes he chanced to pick up.

Among these books I noted masterpieces by the greats of ancient and modern times, in other words, all of humanity's finest achievements in history, poetry, fiction, and science, from Homer to Victor Hugo, from Xenophon to Michelet, from Rabelais to Madame George Sand.

But science, in particular, represented the major investment of this library: books on mechanics, ballistics, hydrography, meteorology, geography, geology, etc., held a place there no less important than works on natural history, and I realized that they made up the captain's chief reading.

There I saw the complete works of Humboldt, the complete Arago, as well as works by Foucault, Henri Sainte-Claire Deville, Chasles, Milne-Edwards, Quatrefages, John Tyndall, Faraday, Berthelot, Father Secchi, Petermann, Commander Maury, Louis Agassiz, etc., plus the transactions of France's Academy of Sciences, bulletins from the various geographical societies, etc., and in a prime location, those two volumes on the great ocean depths that had perhaps earned me this comparatively charitable welcome from Captain Nemo.

Among the works of Joseph Bertrand, his book entitled The Founders of Astronomy even gave me a definite date; and since I knew it had appeared in the course of 1865, I concluded that the fitting out of the Nautilus hadn't taken place before then.

Accordingly, three years ago at the most, Captain Nemo had begun his underwater existence.

Moreover, I hoped some books even more recent would permit me to pinpoint the date precisely; but I had plenty of time to look for them, and I didn't want to put off any longer our stroll through the wonders of the Nautilus.

"Sir,"

I told the captain, "thank you for placing this library at my disposal.

There are scientific treasures here, and I'll take advantage of them."

"This room isn't only a library,"

Captain Nemo said, "it's also a smoking room."

"A smoking room?"

I exclaimed.

"Then one may smoke on board?"

"Surely."

"In that case, sir, I'm forced to believe that you've kept up relations with Havana."

"None whatever,"

the captain replied.

"Try this cigar, Professor Aronnax, and even though it doesn't come from Havana, it will satisfy you if you're a connoisseur."

I took the cigar offered me, whose shape recalled those from Cuba; but it seemed to be made of gold leaf.

I lit it at a small brazier supported by an elegant bronze stand, and I inhaled my first whiffs with the relish of a smoker who hasn't had a puff in days.

"It's excellent,"

I said, "but it's not from the tobacco plant."

"Right,"

the captain replied, "this tobacco comes from neither Havana nor the Orient.

It's a kind of nicotine-rich seaweed that the ocean supplies me, albeit sparingly.

Do you still miss your Cubans, sir?"

"Captain, I scorn them from this day forward."

"Then smoke these cigars whenever you like, without debating their origin.

They bear no government seal of approval, but I imagine they're none the worse for it."

"On the contrary."

Just then Captain Nemo opened a door facing the one by which I had entered the library, and I passed into an immense, splendidly lit lounge.

It was a huge quadrilateral with canted corners, ten meters long, six wide, five high.

A luminous ceiling, decorated with delicate arabesques, distributed a soft, clear daylight over all the wonders gathered in this museum.

For a museum it truly was, in which clever hands had spared no expense to amass every natural and artistic treasure, displaying them with the helter-skelter picturesqueness that distinguishes a painter's studio.

Some thirty pictures by the masters, uniformly framed and separated by gleaming panoplies of arms, adorned walls on which were stretched tapestries of austere design.

There I saw canvases of the highest value, the likes of which I had marveled at in private European collections and art exhibitions.

The various schools of the old masters were represented by a Raphael Madonna, a Virgin by Leonardo da Vinci, a nymph by Correggio, a woman by Titian, an adoration of the Magi by Veronese, an assumption of the Virgin by Murillo, a Holbein portrait, a monk by Velazquez, a martyr by Ribera, a village fair by Rubens, two Flemish landscapes by Teniers, three little genre paintings by Gerard Dow, Metsu, and Paul Potter, two canvases by Gericault and Prud'hon, plus seascapes by Backhuysen and Vernet.

Among the works of modern art were pictures signed by Delacroix, Ingres, Decamps, Troyon, Meissonier, Daubigny, etc., and some wonderful miniature statues in marble or bronze, modeled after antiquity's finest originals, stood on their pedestals in the corners of this magnificent museum.

As the Nautilus's commander had predicted, my mind was already starting to fall into that promised state of stunned amazement.

"Professor,"

this strange man then said, "you must excuse the informality with which I receive you, and the disorder reigning in this lounge."

"Sir,"

I replied, "without prying into who you are, might I venture to identify you as an artist?"

"A collector, sir, nothing more.

Formerly I loved acquiring these beautiful works created by the hand of man.

I sought them greedily, ferreted them out tirelessly, and I've been able to gather some objects of great value.

They're my last mementos of those shores that are now dead for me.

In my eyes, your modern artists are already as old as the ancients.

They've existed for 2,000 or 3,000 years, and I mix them up in my mind.

The masters are ageless."

"What about these composers?"

I said, pointing to sheet music by Weber, Rossini, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, Meyerbeer, Hrold, Wagner, Auber, Gounod, Victor Mass, and a number of others scattered over a full size piano-organ, which occupied one of the wall panels in this lounge.

"These composers,"

Captain Nemo answered me, "are the contemporaries of Orpheus, because in the annals of the dead, all chronological differences fade; and I'm dead, professor, quite as dead as those friends of yours sleeping six feet under!"

Captain Nemo fell silent and seemed lost in reverie.

I regarded him with intense excitement, silently analyzing his strange facial expression.

Leaning his elbow on the corner of a valuable mosaic table, he no longer saw me, he had forgotten my very presence.

I didn't disturb his meditations but continued to pass in review the curiosities that enriched this lounge.

After the works of art, natural rarities predominated.

They consisted chiefly of plants, shells, and other exhibits from the ocean that must have been Captain Nemo's own personal finds.

In the middle of the lounge, a jet of water, electrically lit, fell back into a basin made from a single giant clam.

The delicately festooned rim of this shell, supplied by the biggest mollusk in the class Acephala, measured about six meters in circumference; so it was even bigger than those fine giant clams given to King Franois I by the Republic of Venice, and which the Church of Saint-Sulpice in Paris has made into two gigantic holy-water fonts.

Around this basin, inside elegant glass cases fastened with copper bands, there were classified and labeled the most valuable marine exhibits ever put before the eyes of a naturalist.

My professorial glee may easily be imagined.

The zoophyte branch offered some very unusual specimens from its two groups, the polyps and the echinoderms.

In the first group: organ-pipe coral, gorgonian coral arranged into fan shapes, soft sponges from Syria, isis coral from the Molucca Islands, sea-pen coral, wonderful coral of the genus Virgularia from the waters of Norway, various coral of the genus Umbellularia, alcyonarian coral, then a whole series of those madrepores that my mentor Professor Milne-Edwards has so shrewdly classified into divisions and among which I noted the wonderful genus Flabellina as well as the genus Oculina from Runion Island, plus a "Neptune's chariot"

from the Caribbean Sea--every superb variety of coral, and in short, every species of these unusual polyparies that congregate to form entire islands that will one day turn into continents.

Among the echinoderms, notable for being covered with spines: starfish, feather stars, sea lilies, free-swimming crinoids, brittle stars, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, etc., represented a complete collection of the individuals in this group.

An excitable conchologist would surely have fainted dead away before other, more numerous glass cases in which were classified specimens from the mollusk branch.

There I saw a collection of incalculable value that I haven't time to describe completely.

Among these exhibits I'll mention, just for the record: an elegant royal hammer shell from the Indian Ocean, whose evenly spaced white spots stood out sharply against a base of red and brown; an imperial spiny oyster, brightly colored, bristling with thorns, a specimen rare to European museums, whose value I estimated at 20,000 francs; a common hammer shell from the seas near Queensland, very hard to come by; exotic cockles from Senegal, fragile white bivalve shells that a single breath could pop like a soap bubble; several varieties of watering-pot shell from Java, a sort of limestone tube fringed with leafy folds and much fought over by collectors; a whole series of top-shell snails--greenish yellow ones fished up from American seas, others colored reddish brown that patronize the waters off Queensland, the former coming from the Gulf of Mexico and notable for their overlapping shells, the latter some sun-carrier shells found in the southernmost seas, finally and rarest of all, the magnificent spurred-star shell from New Zealand; then some wonderful peppery-furrow shells; several valuable species of cythera clams and venus clams; the trellis wentletrap snail from Tranquebar on India's eastern shore; a marbled turban snail gleaming with mother-of-pearl; green parrot shells from the seas of China; the virtually unknown cone snail from the genus Coenodullus; every variety of cowry used as money in India and Africa; a "glory-of-the-seas,"

the most valuable shell in the East Indies; finally, common periwinkles, delphinula snails, turret snails, violet snails, European cowries, volute snails, olive shells, miter shells, helmet shells, murex snails, whelks, harp shells, spiky periwinkles, triton snails, horn shells, spindle shells, conch shells, spider conchs, limpets, glass snails, sea butterflies-- every kind of delicate, fragile seashell that science has baptized with its most delightful names.

Aside and in special compartments, strings of supremely beautiful pearls were spread out, the electric light flecking them with little fiery sparks: pink pearls pulled from saltwater fan shells in the Red Sea; green pearls from the rainbow abalone; yellow, blue, and black pearls, the unusual handiwork of various mollusks from every ocean and of certain mussels from rivers up north; in short, several specimens of incalculable worth that had been oozed by the rarest of shellfish.

Some of these pearls were bigger than a pigeon egg; they more than equaled the one that the explorer Tavernier sold the Shah of Persia for 3,000,000 francs, and they surpassed that other pearl owned by the Imam of Muscat, which I had believed to be unrivaled in the entire world.

Consequently, to calculate the value of this collection was, I should say, impossible.

Captain Nemo must have spent millions in acquiring these different specimens, and I was wondering what financial resources he tapped to satisfy his collector's fancies, when these words interrupted me: "You're examining my shells, professor?

They're indeed able to fascinate a naturalist; but for me they have an added charm, since I've collected every one of them with my own two hands, and not a sea on the globe has escaped my investigations."

"I understand, captain, I understand your delight at strolling in the midst of this wealth.

You're a man who gathers his treasure in person.

No museum in Europe owns such a collection of exhibits from the ocean.

But if I exhaust all my wonderment on them, I'll have nothing left for the ship that carries them!

I have absolutely no wish to probe those secrets of yours!

But I confess that my curiosity is aroused to the limit by this Nautilus, the motor power it contains, the equipment enabling it to operate, the ultra powerful force that brings it to life.

I see some instruments hanging on the walls of this lounge whose purposes are unknown to me.

May I learn--"

"Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo answered me, "I've said you'd be free aboard my vessel, so no part of the Nautilus is off-limits to you.

You may inspect it in detail, and I'll be delighted to act as your guide."

"I don't know how to thank you, sir, but I won't abuse your good nature.

I would only ask you about the uses intended for these instruments of physical measure--"

"Professor, these same instruments are found in my stateroom, where I'll have the pleasure of explaining their functions to you.

But beforehand, come inspect the cabin set aside for you.

You need to learn how you'll be lodged aboard the Nautilus."

I followed Captain Nemo, who, via one of the doors cut into the lounge's canted corners, led me back down the ship's gangways.

He took me to the bow, and there I found not just a cabin but an elegant stateroom with a bed, a washstand, and various other furnishings.

I could only thank my host.

"Your stateroom adjoins mine,"

he told me, opening a door, "and mine leads into that lounge we've just left."

I entered the captain's stateroom.

It had an austere, almost monastic appearance.

An iron bedstead, a worktable, some washstand fixtures.

Subdued lighting.

No luxuries.

Just the bare necessities.

Captain Nemo showed me to a bench.

"Kindly be seated,"

he told me.

I sat, and he began speaking as follows: Everything through Electricity "SIR,"

CAPTAIN NEMO SAID, showing me the instruments hanging on the walls of his stateroom, "these are the devices needed to navigate the Nautilus.

Here, as in the lounge, I always have them before my eyes, and they indicate my position and exact heading in the midst of the ocean.

You're familiar with some of them, such as the thermometer, which gives the temperature inside the Nautilus; the barometer, which measures the heaviness of the outside air and forecasts changes in the weather; the humidistat, which indicates the degree of dryness in the atmosphere; the storm glass, whose mixture decomposes to foretell the arrival of tempests; the compass, which steers my course; the sextant, which takes the sun's altitude and tells me my latitude; chronometers, which allow me to calculate my longitude; and finally, spyglasses for both day and night, enabling me to scrutinize every point of the horizon once the Nautilus has risen to the surface of the waves."

"These are the normal navigational instruments,"

I replied, "and I'm familiar with their uses.

But no doubt these others answer pressing needs unique to the Nautilus.

That dial I see there, with the needle moving across it--isn't it a pressure gauge?"

"It is indeed a pressure gauge.

It's placed in contact with the water, and it indicates the outside pressure on our hull, which in turn gives me the depth at which my submersible is sitting."

"And these are some new breed of sounding line?"

"They're thermometric sounding lines that report water temperatures in the different strata."

"And these other instruments, whose functions I can't even guess?"

"Here, professor, I need to give you some background information,"

Captain Nemo said.

"So kindly hear me out."

He fell silent for some moments, then he said: "There's a powerful, obedient, swift, and effortless force that can be bent to any use and which reigns supreme aboard my vessel.

It does everything.

It lights me, it warms me, it's the soul of my mechanical equipment.

This force is electricity."

"Electricity!"

I exclaimed in some surprise.

"Yes, sir."

"But, captain, you have a tremendous speed of movement that doesn't square with the strength of electricity.

Until now, its dynamic potential has remained quite limited, capable of producing only small amounts of power!"

"Professor,"

Captain Nemo replied, "my electricity isn't the run-of-the-mill variety, and with your permission, I'll leave it at that."

"I won't insist, sir, and I'll rest content with simply being flabbergasted at your results.

I would ask one question, however, which you needn't answer if it's indiscreet.

The electric cells you use to generate this marvelous force must be depleted very quickly.

Their zinc component, for example: how do you replace it, since you no longer stay in contact with the shore?"

"That question deserves an answer,"

Captain Nemo replied.

"First off, I'll mention that at the bottom of the sea there exist veins of zinc, iron, silver, and gold whose mining would quite certainly be feasible.

But I've tapped none of these land-based metals, and I wanted to make demands only on the sea itself for the sources of my electricity."

"The sea itself?"

"Yes, professor, and there was no shortage of such sources.

In fact, by establishing a circuit between two wires immersed to different depths, I'd be able to obtain electricity through the diverging temperatures they experience; but I preferred to use a more practical procedure."

"And that is?"

"You're familiar with the composition of salt water.

In 1,000 grams one finds 96.5% water and about 2.66% sodium chloride; then small quantities of magnesium chloride, potassium chloride, magnesium bromide, sulfate of magnesia, calcium sulfate, and calcium carbonate.

Hence you observe that sodium chloride is encountered there in significant proportions.

Now then, it's this sodium that I extract from salt water and with which I compose my electric cells."

"Sodium?"

"Yes, sir.

Mixed with mercury, it forms an amalgam that takes the place of zinc in Bunsen cells.

The mercury is never depleted.

Only the sodium is consumed, and the sea itself gives me that.

Beyond this, I'll mention that sodium batteries have been found to generate the greater energy, and their electro-motor strength is twice that of zinc batteries."

"Captain, I fully understand the excellence of sodium under the conditions in which you're placed.

The sea contains it.

Fine.

But it still has to be produced, in short, extracted.

And how do you accomplish this?

Obviously your batteries could do the extracting; but if I'm not mistaken, the consumption of sodium needed by your electric equipment would be greater than the quantity you'd extract.

It would come about, then, that in the process of producing your sodium, you'd use up more than you'd make!"

"Accordingly, professor, I don't extract it with batteries; quite simply, I utilize the heat of coal from the earth."

"From the earth?"

I said, my voice going up on the word.

"We'll say coal from the seafloor, if you prefer,"

Captain Nemo replied.

"And you can mine these veins of underwater coal?"

"You'll watch me work them, Professor Aronnax.

I ask only a little patience of you, since you'll have ample time to be patient.

Just remember one thing: I owe everything to the ocean; it generates electricity, and electricity gives the Nautilus heat, light, motion, and, in a word, life itself."

"But not the air you breathe?"

"Oh, I could produce the air needed on board, but it would be pointless, since I can rise to the surface of the sea whenever I like.

However, even though electricity doesn't supply me with breathable air, it at least operates the powerful pumps that store it under pressure in special tanks; which, if need be, allows me to extend my stay in the lower strata for as long as I want."

"Captain,"

I replied, "I'll rest content with marveling.

You've obviously found what all mankind will surely find one day, the true dynamic power of electricity."

"I'm not so certain they'll find it,"

Captain Nemo replied icily.

"But be that as it may, you're already familiar with the first use I've found for this valuable force.

It lights us, and with a uniformity and continuity not even possessed by sunlight.

Now, look at that clock: it's electric, it runs with an accuracy rivaling the finest chronometers.

I've had it divided into twenty-four hours like Italian clocks, since neither day nor night, sun nor moon, exist for me, but only this artificial light that I import into the depths of the seas!

See, right now it's ten o'clock in the morning."

"That's perfect."

"Another use for electricity: that dial hanging before our eyes indicates how fast the Nautilus is going.

An electric wire puts it in contact with the patent log; this needle shows me the actual speed of my submersible.

And .

.

.

hold on .

.

.

just now we're proceeding at the moderate pace of fifteen miles per hour."

"It's marvelous,"

I replied, "and I truly see, captain, how right you are to use this force; it's sure to take the place of wind, water, and steam."

"But that's not all, Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo said, standing up.

"And if you'd care to follow me, we'll inspect the Nautilus's stern."

In essence, I was already familiar with the whole forward part of this underwater boat, and here are its exact subdivisions going from amidships to its spur: the dining room, 5 meters long and separated from the library by a watertight bulkhead, in other words, it couldn't be penetrated by the sea; the library, 5 meters long; the main lounge, 10 meters long, separated from the captain's stateroom by a second watertight bulkhead; the aforesaid stateroom, 5 meters long; mine, 2.5 meters long; and finally, air tanks 7.5 meters long and extending to the stempost.

Total: a length of 35 meters.

Doors were cut into the watertight bulkheads and were shut hermetically by means of india-rubber seals, which insured complete safety aboard the Nautilus in the event of a leak in any one section.

I followed Captain Nemo down gangways located for easy transit, and I arrived amidships.

There I found a sort of shaft heading upward between two watertight bulkheads.

An iron ladder, clamped to the wall, led to the shaft's upper end.

I asked the captain what this ladder was for.

"It goes to the skiff,"

he replied.

"What!

You have a skiff?"

I replied in some astonishment.

"Surely.

An excellent longboat, light and unsinkable, which is used for excursions and fishing trips."

"But when you want to set out, don't you have to return to the surface of the sea?"

"By no means.

The skiff is attached to the topside of the Nautilus's hull and is set in a cavity expressly designed to receive it.

It's completely decked over, absolutely watertight, and held solidly in place by bolts.

This ladder leads to a manhole cut into the Nautilus's hull and corresponding to a comparable hole cut into the side of the skiff.

I insert myself through this double opening into the longboat.

My crew close up the hole belonging to the Nautilus; I close up the one belonging to the skiff, simply by screwing it into place.

I undo the bolts holding the skiff to the submersible, and the longboat rises with prodigious speed to the surface of the sea.

I then open the deck paneling, carefully closed until that point; I up mast and hoist sail--or I take out my oars--and I go for a spin."

"But how do you return to the ship?"

"I don't, Professor Aronnax; the Nautilus returns to me."

"At your command?"

"At my command.

An electric wire connects me to the ship.

I fire off a telegram, and that's that."

"Right,"

I said, tipsy from all these wonders, "nothing to it!"

After passing the well of the companionway that led to the platform, I saw a cabin 2 meters long in which Conseil and Ned Land, enraptured with their meal, were busy devouring it to the last crumb.

Then a door opened into the galley, 3 meters long and located between the vessel's huge storage lockers.

There, even more powerful and obedient than gas, electricity did most of the cooking.

Arriving under the stoves, wires transmitted to platinum griddles a heat that was distributed and sustained with perfect consistency.

It also heated a distilling mechanism that, via evaporation, supplied excellent drinking water.

Next to this galley was a bathroom, conveniently laid out, with faucets supplying hot or cold water at will.

After the galley came the crew's quarters, 5 meters long.

But the door was closed and I couldn't see its accommodations, which might have told me the number of men it took to operate the Nautilus.

At the far end stood a fourth watertight bulkhead, separating the crew's quarters from the engine room.

A door opened, and I stood in the compartment where Captain Nemo, indisputably a world-class engineer, had set up his locomotive equipment.

Brightly lit, the engine room measured at least 20 meters in length.

It was divided, by function, into two parts: the first contained the cells for generating electricity, the second that mechanism transmitting movement to the propeller.

Right off, I detected an odor permeating the compartment that was sui generis.* Captain Nemo noticed the negative impression it made on me.

*Latin: "in a class by itself."

Ed.

"That,"

he told me, "is a gaseous discharge caused by our use of sodium, but it's only a mild inconvenience.

In any event, every morning we sanitize the ship by ventilating it in the open air."

Meanwhile I examined the Nautilus's engine with a fascination easy to imagine.

"You observe,"

Captain Nemo told me, "that I use Bunsen cells, not Ruhmkorff cells.

The latter would be ineffectual.

One uses fewer Bunsen cells, but they're big and strong, and experience has proven their superiority.

The electricity generated here makes its way to the stern, where electromagnets of huge size activate a special system of levers and gears that transmit movement to the propeller's shaft.

The latter has a diameter of 6 meters, a pitch of 7.5 meters, and can do up to 120 revolutions per minute."

"And that gives you?"

"A speed of fifty miles per hour."

There lay a mystery, but I didn't insist on exploring it.

How could electricity work with such power?

Where did this nearly unlimited energy originate?

Was it in the extraordinary voltage obtained from some new kind of induction coil?

Could its transmission have been immeasurably increased by some unknown system of levers?** This was the point I couldn't grasp.

**Author's Note: And sure enough, there's now talk of such a discovery, in which a new set of levers generates considerable power.

Did its inventor meet up with Captain Nemo?

"Captain Nemo,"

I said, "I'll vouch for the results and not try to explain them.

I've seen the Nautilus at work out in front of the Abraham Lincoln, and I know where I stand on its speed.

But it isn't enough just to move, we have to see where we're going!

We must be able to steer right or left, up or down!

How do you reach the lower depths, where you meet an increasing resistance that's assessed in hundreds of atmospheres?

How do you rise back to the surface of the ocean?

Finally, how do you keep your ship at whatever level suits you?

Am I indiscreet in asking you all these things?"

"Not at all, professor,"

the captain answered me after a slight hesitation, "since you'll never leave this underwater boat.

Come into the lounge.

It's actually our work room, and there you'll learn the full story about the Nautilus!"

Some Figures A MOMENT LATER we were seated on a couch in the lounge, cigars between our lips.

The captain placed before my eyes a working drawing that gave the ground plan, cross section, and side view of the Nautilus.

Then he began his description as follows: "Here, Professor Aronnax, are the different dimensions of this boat now transporting you.

It's a very long cylinder with conical ends.

It noticeably takes the shape of a cigar, a shape already adopted in London for several projects of the same kind.

The length of this cylinder from end to end is exactly seventy meters, and its maximum breadth of beam is eight meters.

So it isn't quite built on the ten-to-one ratio of your high-speed steamers; but its lines are sufficiently long, and their tapering gradual enough, so that the displaced water easily slips past and poses no obstacle to the ship's movements.

"These two dimensions allow you to obtain, via a simple calculation, the surface area and volume of the Nautilus.

Its surface area totals 1,011.45 square meters, its volume 1,507.2 cubic meters-- which is tantamount to saying that when it's completely submerged, it displaces 1,500 cubic meters of water, or weighs 1,500 metric tons.

"In drawing up plans for a ship meant to navigate underwater, I wanted it, when floating on the waves, to lie nine-tenths below the surface and to emerge only one-tenth.

Consequently, under these conditions it needed to displace only nine-tenths of its volume, hence 1,356.48 cubic meters; in other words, it was to weigh only that same number of metric tons.

So I was obliged not to exceed this weight while building it to the aforesaid dimensions.

"The Nautilus is made up of two hulls, one inside the other; between them, joining them together, are iron T-bars that give this ship the utmost rigidity.

In fact, thanks to this cellular arrangement, it has the resistance of a stone block, as if it were completely solid.

Its plating can't give way; it's self-adhering and not dependent on the tightness of its rivets; and due to the perfect union of its materials, the solidarity of its construction allows it to defy the most violent seas.

"The two hulls are manufactured from boilerplate steel, whose relative density is 7.8 times that of water.

The first hull has a thickness of no less than five centimeters and weighs 394.96 metric tons.

My second hull, the outer cover, includes a keel fifty centimeters high by twenty-five wide, which by itself weighs 62 metric tons; this hull, the engine, the ballast, the various accessories and accommodations, plus the bulkheads and interior braces, have a combined weight of 961.52 metric tons, which when added to 394.96 metric tons, gives us the desired total of 1,356.48 metric tons.

Clear?"

"Clear,"

I replied.

"So,"

the captain went on, "when the Nautilus lies on the waves under these conditions, one-tenth of it does emerge above water.

Now then, if I provide some ballast tanks equal in capacity to that one-tenth, hence able to hold 150.72 metric tons, and if I fill them with water, the boat then displaces 1,507.2 metric tons-- or it weighs that much--and it would be completely submerged.

That's what comes about, professor.

These ballast tanks exist within easy access in the lower reaches of the Nautilus.

I open some stopcocks, the tanks fill, the boat sinks, and it's exactly flush with the surface of the water."

"Fine, captain, but now we come to a genuine difficulty.

You're able to lie flush with the surface of the ocean, that I understand.

But lower down, while diving beneath that surface, isn't your submersible going to encounter a pressure, and consequently undergo an upward thrust, that must be assessed at one atmosphere per every thirty feet of water, hence at about one kilogram per each square centimeter?"

"Precisely, sir."

"Then unless you fill up the whole Nautilus, I don't see how you can force it down into the heart of these liquid masses."

"Professor,"

Captain Nemo replied, "static objects mustn't be confused with dynamic ones, or we'll be open to serious error.

Comparatively little effort is spent in reaching the ocean's lower regions, because all objects have a tendency to become 'sinkers.' Follow my logic here."

"I'm all ears, captain."

"When I wanted to determine what increase in weight the Nautilus needed to be given in order to submerge, I had only to take note of the proportionate reduction in volume that salt water experiences in deeper and deeper strata."

"That's obvious,"

I replied.

"Now then, if water isn't absolutely incompressible, at least it compresses very little.

In fact, according to the most recent calculations, this reduction is only .0000436 per atmosphere, or per every thirty feet of depth.

For instance, to go 1,000 meters down, I must take into account the reduction in volume that occurs under a pressure equivalent to that from a 1,000-meter column of water, in other words, under a pressure of 100 atmospheres.

In this instance the reduction would be .00436.

Consequently, I'd have to increase my weight from 1,507.2 metric tons to 1,513.77.

So the added weight would only be 6.57 metric tons."

"That's all?"

"That's all, Professor Aronnax, and the calculation is easy to check.

Now then, I have supplementary ballast tanks capable of shipping 100 metric tons of water.

So I can descend to considerable depths.

When I want to rise again and lie flush with the surface, all I have to do is expel that water; and if I desire that the Nautilus emerge above the waves to one-tenth of its total capacity, I empty all the ballast tanks completely."

This logic, backed up by figures, left me without a single objection.

"I accept your calculations, captain,"

I replied, "and I'd be ill-mannered to dispute them, since your daily experience bears them out.

But at this juncture, I have a hunch that we're still left with one real difficulty."

"What's that, sir?"

"When you're at a depth of 1,000 meters, the Nautilus's plating bears a pressure of 100 atmospheres.

If at this point you want to empty the supplementary ballast tanks in order to lighten your boat and rise to the surface, your pumps must overcome that pressure of 100 atmospheres, which is 100 kilograms per each square centimeter.

This demands a strength--"

"That electricity alone can give me,"

Captain Nemo said swiftly.

"Sir, I repeat: the dynamic power of my engines is nearly infinite.

The Nautilus's pumps have prodigious strength, as you must have noticed when their waterspouts swept like a torrent over the Abraham Lincoln.

Besides, I use my supplementary ballast tanks only to reach an average depth of 1,500 to 2,000 meters, and that with a view to conserving my machinery.

Accordingly, when I have a mind to visit the ocean depths two or three vertical leagues beneath the surface, I use maneuvers that are more time-consuming but no less infallible."

"What are they, captain?"

I asked.

"Here I'm naturally led into telling you how the Nautilus is maneuvered."

"I can't wait to find out."

"In order to steer this boat to port or starboard, in short, to make turns on a horizontal plane, I use an ordinary, wide-bladed rudder that's fastened to the rear of the sternpost and worked by a wheel and tackle.

But I can also move the Nautilus upward and downward on a vertical plane by the simple method of slanting its two fins, which are attached to its sides at its center of flotation; these fins are flexible, able to assume any position, and can be operated from inside by means of powerful levers.

If these fins stay parallel with the boat, the latter moves horizontally.

If they slant, the Nautilus follows the angle of that slant and, under its propeller's thrust, either sinks on a diagonal as steep as it suits me, or rises on that diagonal.

And similarly, if I want to return more swiftly to the surface, I throw the propeller in gear, and the water's pressure makes the Nautilus rise vertically, as an air balloon inflated with hydrogen lifts swiftly into the skies."

"Bravo, captain!"

I exclaimed.

"But in the midst of the waters, how can your helmsman follow the course you've given him?"

"My helmsman is stationed behind the windows of a pilothouse, which protrudes from the topside of the Nautilus's hull and is fitted with biconvex glass."

"Is glass capable of resisting such pressures?"

"Perfectly capable.

Though fragile on impact, crystal can still offer considerable resistance.

In 1864, during experiments on fishing by electric light in the middle of the North Sea, glass panes less than seven millimeters thick were seen to resist a pressure of sixteen atmospheres, all the while letting through strong, heat-generating rays whose warmth was unevenly distributed.

Now then, I use glass windows measuring no less than twenty-one centimeters at their centers; in other words, they've thirty times the thickness."

"Fair enough, captain, but if we're going to see, we need light to drive away the dark, and in the midst of the murky waters, I wonder how your helmsman can--"

"Set astern of the pilothouse is a powerful electric reflector whose rays light up the sea for a distance of half a mile."

"Oh, bravo!

Bravo three times over, captain!

That explains the phosphorescent glow from this so-called narwhale that so puzzled us scientists!

Pertinent to this, I'll ask you if the Nautilus's running afoul of the Scotia, which caused such a great uproar, was the result of an accidental encounter?"

"Entirely accidental, sir.

I was navigating two meters beneath the surface of the water when the collision occurred.

However, I could see that it had no dire consequences."

"None, sir.

But as for your encounter with the Abraham Lincoln .

.

.

?"

"Professor, that troubled me, because it's one of the best ships in the gallant American navy, but they attacked me and I had to defend myself!

All the same, I was content simply to put the frigate in a condition where it could do me no harm; it won't have any difficulty getting repairs at the nearest port."

"Ah, commander,"

I exclaimed with conviction, "your Nautilus is truly a marvelous boat!"

"Yes, professor,"

Captain Nemo replied with genuine excitement, "and I love it as if it were my own flesh and blood!

Aboard a conventional ship, facing the ocean's perils, danger lurks everywhere; on the surface of the sea, your chief sensation is the constant feeling of an underlying chasm, as the Dutchman Jansen so aptly put it; but below the waves aboard the Nautilus, your heart never fails you!

There are no structural deformities to worry about, because the double hull of this boat has the rigidity of iron; no rigging to be worn out by rolling and pitching on the waves; no sails for the wind to carry off; no boilers for steam to burst open; no fires to fear, because this submersible is made of sheet iron not wood; no coal to run out of, since electricity is its mechanical force; no collisions to fear, because it navigates the watery deep all by itself; no storms to brave, because just a few meters beneath the waves, it finds absolute tranquility!

There, sir.

There's the ideal ship!

And if it's true that the engineer has more confidence in a craft than the builder, and the builder more than the captain himself, you can understand the utter abandon with which I place my trust in this Nautilus, since I'm its captain, builder, and engineer all in one!"

Captain Nemo spoke with winning eloquence.

The fire in his eyes and the passion in his gestures transfigured him.

Yes, he loved his ship the same way a father loves his child!

But one question, perhaps indiscreet, naturally popped up, and I couldn't resist asking it.

"You're an engineer, then, Captain Nemo?"

"Yes, professor,"

he answered me.

"I studied in London, Paris, and New York back in the days when I was a resident of the earth's continents."

"But how were you able to build this wonderful Nautilus in secret?"

"Each part of it, Professor Aronnax, came from a different spot on the globe and reached me at a cover address.

Its keel was forged by Creusot in France, its propeller shaft by Pen & Co.

in London, the sheet-iron plates for its hull by Laird's in Liverpool, its propeller by Scott's in Glasgow.

Its tanks were manufactured by Cail & Co.

in Paris, its engine by Krupp in Prussia, its spur by the Motala workshops in Sweden, its precision instruments by Hart Bros.

in New York, etc.; and each of these suppliers received my specifications under a different name."

"But,"

I went on, "once these parts were manufactured, didn't they have to be mounted and adjusted?"

"Professor, I set up my workshops on a deserted islet in midocean.

There our Nautilus was completed by me and my workmen, in other words, by my gallant companions whom I've molded and educated.

Then, when the operation was over, we burned every trace of our stay on that islet, which if I could have, I'd have blown up."

"From all this, may I assume that such a boat costs a fortune?"

"An iron ship, Professor Aronnax, runs 1,125 francs per metric ton.

Now then, the Nautilus has a burden of 1,500 metric tons.

Consequently, it cost 1,687,000 francs, hence 2,000,000 francs including its accommodations, and 4,000,000 or 5,000,000 with all the collections and works of art it contains."

"One last question, Captain Nemo."

"Ask, professor."

"You're rich, then?"

"Infinitely rich, sir, and without any trouble, I could pay off the ten-billion-franc French national debt!"

I gaped at the bizarre individual who had just spoken these words.

Was he playing on my credulity?

Time would tell.

The Black Current THE PART OF THE planet earth that the seas occupy has been assessed at 3,832,558 square myriameters, hence more than 38,000,000,000 hectares.

This liquid mass totals 2,250,000,000 cubic miles and could form a sphere with a diameter of sixty leagues, whose weight would be three quintillion metric tons.

To appreciate such a number, we should remember that a quintillion is to a billion what a billion is to one, in other words, there are as many billions in a quintillion as ones in a billion!

Now then, this liquid mass nearly equals the total amount of water that has poured through all the earth's rivers for the past 40,000 years!

During prehistoric times, an era of fire was followed by an era of water.

At first there was ocean everywhere.

Then, during the Silurian period, the tops of mountains gradually appeared above the waves, islands emerged, disappeared beneath temporary floods, rose again, were fused to form continents, and finally the earth's geography settled into what we have today.

Solid matter had wrested from liquid matter some 37,657,000 square miles, hence 12,916,000,000 hectares.

The outlines of the continents allow the seas to be divided into five major parts: the frozen Arctic and Antarctic oceans, the Indian Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean.

The Pacific Ocean extends north to south between the two polar circles and east to west between America and Asia over an expanse of 145 degrees of longitude.

It's the most tranquil of the seas; its currents are wide and slow-moving, its tides moderate, its rainfall abundant.

And this was the ocean that I was first destined to cross under these strangest of auspices.

"If you don't mind, professor,"

Captain Nemo told me, "we'll determine our exact position and fix the starting point of our voyage.

It's fifteen minutes before noon.

I'm going to rise to the surface of the water."

The captain pressed an electric bell three times.

The pumps began to expel water from the ballast tanks; on the pressure gauge, a needle marked the decreasing pressures that indicated the Nautilus's upward progress; then the needle stopped.

"Here we are,"

the captain said.

I made my way to the central companionway, which led to the platform.

I climbed its metal steps, passed through the open hatches, and arrived topside on the Nautilus.

The platform emerged only eighty centimeters above the waves.

The Nautilus's bow and stern boasted that spindle-shaped outline that had caused the ship to be compared appropriately to a long cigar.

I noted the slight overlap of its sheet-iron plates, which resembled the scales covering the bodies of our big land reptiles.

So I had a perfectly natural explanation for why, despite the best spyglasses, this boat had always been mistaken for a marine animal.

Near the middle of the platform, the skiff was half set in the ship's hull, making a slight bulge.

Fore and aft stood two cupolas of moderate height, their sides slanting and partly inset with heavy biconvex glass, one reserved for the helmsman steering the Nautilus, the other for the brilliance of the powerful electric beacon lighting his way.

The sea was magnificent, the skies clear.

This long aquatic vehicle could barely feel the broad undulations of the ocean.

A mild breeze out of the east rippled the surface of the water.

Free of all mist, the horizon was ideal for taking sights.

There was nothing to be seen.

Not a reef, not an islet.

No more Abraham Lincoln.

A deserted immenseness.

Raising his sextant, Captain Nemo took the altitude of the sun, which would give him his latitude.

He waited for a few minutes until the orb touched the rim of the horizon.

While he was taking his sights, he didn't move a muscle, and the instrument couldn't have been steadier in hands made out of marble.

"Noon,"

he said.

"Professor, whenever you're ready.

.

.

."

I took one last look at the sea, a little yellowish near the landing places of Japan, and I went below again to the main lounge.

There the captain fixed his position and used a chronometer to calculate his longitude, which he double-checked against his previous observations of hour angles.

Then he told me: "Professor Aronnax, we're in longitude 137 degrees 15' west--"

"West of which meridian?"

I asked quickly, hoping the captain's reply might give me a clue to his nationality.

"Sir,"

he answered me, "I have chronometers variously set to the meridians of Paris, Greenwich, and Washington, D.C.

But in your honor, I'll use the one for Paris."

This reply told me nothing.

I bowed, and the commander went on: "We're in longitude 137 degrees 15' west of the meridian of Paris, and latitude 30 degrees 7' north, in other words, about 300 miles from the shores of Japan.

At noon on this day of November 8, we hereby begin our voyage of exploration under the waters."

"May God be with us!"

I replied.

"And now, professor,"

the captain added, "I'll leave you to your intellectual pursuits.

I've set our course east-northeast at a depth of fifty meters.

Here are some large-scale charts on which you'll be able to follow that course.

The lounge is at your disposal, and with your permission, I'll take my leave."

Captain Nemo bowed.

I was left to myself, lost in my thoughts.

They all centered on the Nautilus's commander.

Would I ever learn the nationality of this eccentric man who had boasted of having none?

His sworn hate for humanity, a hate that perhaps was bent on some dreadful revenge--what had provoked it?

Was he one of those unappreciated scholars, one of those geniuses "embittered by the world,"

as Conseil expressed it, a latter-day Galileo, or maybe one of those men of science, like America's Commander Maury, whose careers were ruined by political revolutions?

I couldn't say yet.

As for me, whom fate had just brought aboard his vessel, whose life he had held in the balance: he had received me coolly but hospitably.

Only, he never took the hand I extended to him.

He never extended his own.

For an entire hour I was deep in these musings, trying to probe this mystery that fascinated me so.

Then my eyes focused on a huge world map displayed on the table, and I put my finger on the very spot where our just-determined longitude and latitude intersected.

Like the continents, the sea has its rivers.

These are exclusive currents that can be identified by their temperature and color, the most remarkable being the one called the Gulf Stream.

Science has defined the global paths of five chief currents: one in the north Atlantic, a second in the south Atlantic, a third in the north Pacific, a fourth in the south Pacific, and a fifth in the southern Indian Ocean.

Also it's likely that a sixth current used to exist in the northern Indian Ocean, when the Caspian and Aral Seas joined up with certain large Asian lakes to form a single uniform expanse of water.

Now then, at the spot indicated on the world map, one of these seagoing rivers was rolling by, the Kuroshio of the Japanese, the Black Current: heated by perpendicular rays from the tropical sun, it leaves the Bay of Bengal, crosses the Strait of Malacca, goes up the shores of Asia, and curves into the north Pacific as far as the Aleutian Islands, carrying along trunks of camphor trees and other local items, the pure indigo of its warm waters sharply contrasting with the ocean's waves.

It was this current the Nautilus was about to cross.

I watched it on the map with my eyes, I saw it lose itself in the immenseness of the Pacific, and I felt myself swept along with it, when Ned Land and Conseil appeared in the lounge doorway.

My two gallant companions stood petrified at the sight of the wonders on display.

"Where are we?"

the Canadian exclaimed.

"In the Quebec Museum?"

"Begging master's pardon,"

Conseil answered, "but this seems more like the Sommerard artifacts exhibition!"

"My friends,"

I replied, signaling them to enter, "you're in neither Canada nor France, but securely aboard the Nautilus, fifty meters below sea level."

"If master says so, then so be it,"

Conseil answered.

"But in all honesty, this lounge is enough to astonish even someone Flemish like myself."

"Indulge your astonishment, my friend, and have a look, because there's plenty of work here for a classifier of your talents."

Conseil needed no encouraging.

Bending over the glass cases, the gallant lad was already muttering choice words from the naturalist's vocabulary: class Gastropoda, family Buccinoidea, genus cowry, species Cypraea madagascariensis, etc.

Meanwhile Ned Land, less dedicated to conchology, questioned me about my interview with Captain Nemo.

Had I discovered who he was, where he came from, where he was heading, how deep he was taking us?

In short, a thousand questions I had no time to answer.

I told him everything I knew--or, rather, everything I didn't know-- and I asked him what he had seen or heard on his part.

"Haven't seen or heard a thing!"

the Canadian replied.

"I haven't even spotted the crew of this boat.

By any chance, could they be electric too?"

"Electric?"

"Oh ye gods, I'm half tempted to believe it!

But back to you, Professor Aronnax,"

Ned Land said, still hanging on to his ideas.

"Can't you tell me how many men are on board?

Ten, twenty, fifty, a hundred?"

"I'm unable to answer you, Mr.

Land.

And trust me on this: for the time being, get rid of these notions of taking over the Nautilus or escaping from it.

This boat is a masterpiece of modern technology, and I'd be sorry to have missed it!

Many people would welcome the circumstances that have been handed us, just to walk in the midst of these wonders.

So keep calm, and let's see what's happening around us."

"See!"

the harpooner exclaimed.

"There's nothing to see, nothing we'll ever see from this sheet-iron prison!

We're simply running around blindfolded--"

Ned Land was just pronouncing these last words when we were suddenly plunged into darkness, utter darkness.

The ceiling lights went out so quickly, my eyes literally ached, just as if we had experienced the opposite sensation of going from the deepest gloom to the brightest sunlight.

We stood stock-still, not knowing what surprise was waiting for us, whether pleasant or unpleasant.

But a sliding sound became audible.

You could tell that some panels were shifting over the Nautilus's sides.

"It's the beginning of the end!"

Ned Land said.

".

.

.

order Hydromedusa,"

Conseil muttered.

Suddenly, through two oblong openings, daylight appeared on both sides of the lounge.

The liquid masses came into view, brightly lit by the ship's electric outpourings.

We were separated from the sea by two panes of glass.

Initially I shuddered at the thought that these fragile partitions could break; but strong copper bands secured them, giving them nearly infinite resistance.

The sea was clearly visible for a one-mile radius around the Nautilus.

What a sight!

What pen could describe it?

Who could portray the effects of this light through these translucent sheets of water, the subtlety of its progressive shadings into the ocean's upper and lower strata?

The transparency of salt water has long been recognized.

Its clarity is believed to exceed that of spring water.

The mineral and organic substances it holds in suspension actually increase its translucency.

In certain parts of the Caribbean Sea, you can see the sandy bottom with startling distinctness as deep as 145 meters down, and the penetrating power of the sun's rays seems to give out only at a depth of 300 meters.

But in this fluid setting traveled by the Nautilus, our electric glow was being generated in the very heart of the waves.

It was no longer illuminated water, it was liquid light.

If we accept the hypotheses of the microbiologist Ehrenberg-- who believes that these underwater depths are lit up by phosphorescent organisms--nature has certainly saved one of her most prodigious sights for residents of the sea, and I could judge for myself from the thousandfold play of the light.

On both sides I had windows opening over these unexplored depths.

The darkness in the lounge enhanced the brightness outside, and we stared as if this clear glass were the window of an immense aquarium.

The Nautilus seemed to be standing still.

This was due to the lack of landmarks.

But streaks of water, parted by the ship's spur, sometimes threaded before our eyes with extraordinary speed.

In wonderment, we leaned on our elbows before these show windows, and our stunned silence remained unbroken until Conseil said: "You wanted to see something, Ned my friend; well, now you have something to see!"

"How unusual!"

the Canadian put in, setting aside his tantrums and getaway schemes while submitting to this irresistible allure.

"A man would go an even greater distance just to stare at such a sight!"

"Ah!"

I exclaimed.

"I see our captain's way of life!

He's found himself a separate world that saves its most astonishing wonders just for him!"

"But where are the fish?"

the Canadian ventured to observe.

"I don't see any fish!"

"Why would you care, Ned my friend?"

Conseil replied.

"Since you have no knowledge of them."

"Me?

A fisherman!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

And on this subject a dispute arose between the two friends, since both were knowledgeable about fish, but from totally different standpoints.

Everyone knows that fish make up the fourth and last class in the vertebrate branch.

They have been quite aptly defined as: "cold-blooded vertebrates with a double circulatory system, breathing through gills, and designed to live in water."

They consist of two distinct series: the series of bony fish, in other words, those whose spines have vertebrae made of bone; and cartilaginous fish, in other words, those whose spines have vertebrae made of cartilage.

Possibly the Canadian was familiar with this distinction, but Conseil knew far more about it; and since he and Ned were now fast friends, he just had to show off.

So he told the harpooner: "Ned my friend, you're a slayer of fish, a highly skilled fisherman.

You've caught a large number of these fascinating animals.

But I'll bet you don't know how they're classified."

"Sure I do,"

the harpooner replied in all seriousness.

"They're classified into fish we eat and fish we don't eat!"

"Spoken like a true glutton,"

Conseil replied.

"But tell me, are you familiar with the differences between bony fish and cartilaginous fish?"

"Just maybe, Conseil."

"And how about the subdivisions of these two large classes?"

"I haven't the foggiest notion,"

the Canadian replied.

"All right, listen and learn, Ned my friend!

Bony fish are subdivided into six orders.

Primo, the acanthopterygians, whose upper jaw is fully formed and free-moving, and whose gills take the shape of a comb.

This order consists of fifteen families, in other words, three-quarters of all known fish.

Example: the common perch."

"Pretty fair eating,"

Ned Land replied.

"Secundo,"

Conseil went on, "the abdominals, whose pelvic fins hang under the abdomen to the rear of the pectorals but aren't attached to the shoulder bone, an order that's divided into five families and makes up the great majority of freshwater fish.

Examples: carp, pike."

"Ugh!"

the Canadian put in with distinct scorn.

"You can keep the freshwater fish!"

"Tertio,"

Conseil said, "the subbrachians, whose pelvic fins are attached under the pectorals and hang directly from the shoulder bone.

This order contains four families.

Examples: flatfish such as sole, turbot, dab, plaice, brill, etc."

"Excellent, really excellent!"

the harpooner exclaimed, interested in fish only from an edible viewpoint.

"Quarto,"

Conseil went on, unabashed, "the apods, with long bodies that lack pelvic fins and are covered by a heavy, often glutinous skin, an order consisting of only one family.

Examples: common eels and electric eels."

"So-so, just so-so!"

Ned Land replied.

"Quinto,"

Conseil said, "the lophobranchians, which have fully formed, free-moving jaws but whose gills consist of little tufts arranged in pairs along their gill arches.

This order includes only one family.

Examples: seahorses and dragonfish."

"Bad, very bad!"

the harpooner replied.

"Sexto and last,"

Conseil said, "the plectognaths, whose maxillary bone is firmly attached to the side of the intermaxillary that forms the jaw, and whose palate arch is locked to the skull by sutures that render the jaw immovable, an order lacking true pelvic fins and which consists of two families.

Examples: puffers and moonfish."

"They're an insult to a frying pan!"

the Canadian exclaimed.

"Are you grasping all this, Ned my friend?"

asked the scholarly Conseil.

"Not a lick of it, Conseil my friend,"

the harpooner replied.

"But keep going, because you fill me with fascination."

"As for cartilaginous fish,"

Conseil went on unflappably, "they consist of only three orders."

"Good news,"

Ned put in.

"Primo, the cyclostomes, whose jaws are fused into a flexible ring and whose gill openings are simply a large number of holes, an order consisting of only one family.

Example: the lamprey."

"An acquired taste,"

Ned Land replied.

"Secundo, the selacians, with gills resembling those of the cyclostomes but whose lower jaw is free-moving.

This order, which is the most important in the class, consists of two families.

Examples: the ray and the shark."

"What!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

"Rays and man-eaters in the same order?

Well, Conseil my friend, on behalf of the rays, I wouldn't advise you to put them in the same fish tank!"

"Tertio,"

Conseil replied, "The sturionians, whose gill opening is the usual single slit adorned with a gill cover, an order consisting of four genera.

Example: the sturgeon."

"Ah, Conseil my friend, you saved the best for last, in my opinion anyhow!

And that's all of 'em?"

"Yes, my gallant Ned,"

Conseil replied.

"And note well, even when one has grasped all this, one still knows next to nothing, because these families are subdivided into genera, subgenera, species, varieties--"

"All right, Conseil my friend,"

the harpooner said, leaning toward the glass panel, "here come a couple of your varieties now!"

"Yes!

Fish!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"One would think he was in front of an aquarium!"

"No,"

I replied, "because an aquarium is nothing more than a cage, and these fish are as free as birds in the air!"

"Well, Conseil my friend, identify them!

Start naming them!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

"Me?"

Conseil replied.

"I'm unable to!

That's my employer's bailiwick!"

And in truth, although the fine lad was a classifying maniac, he was no naturalist, and I doubt that he could tell a bonito from a tuna.

In short, he was the exact opposite of the Canadian, who knew nothing about classification but could instantly put a name to any fish.

"A triggerfish,"

I said.

"It's a Chinese triggerfish,"

Ned Land replied.

"Genus Balistes, family Scleroderma, order Plectognatha,"

Conseil muttered.

Assuredly, Ned and Conseil in combination added up to one outstanding naturalist.

The Canadian was not mistaken.

Cavorting around the Nautilus was a school of triggerfish with flat bodies, grainy skins, armed with stings on their dorsal fins, and with four prickly rows of quills quivering on both sides of their tails.

Nothing could have been more wonderful than the skin covering them: white underneath, gray above, with spots of gold sparkling in the dark eddies of the waves.

Around them, rays were undulating like sheets flapping in the wind, and among these I spotted, much to my glee, a Chinese ray, yellowish on its topside, a dainty pink on its belly, and armed with three stings behind its eyes; a rare species whose very existence was still doubted in Lacpde's day, since that pioneering classifier of fish had seen one only in a portfolio of Japanese drawings.

For two hours a whole aquatic army escorted the Nautilus.

In the midst of their leaping and cavorting, while they competed with each other in beauty, radiance, and speed, I could distinguish some green wrasse, bewhiskered mullet marked with pairs of black lines, white gobies from the genus Eleotris with curved caudal fins and violet spots on the back, wonderful Japanese mackerel from the genus Scomber with blue bodies and silver heads, glittering azure goldfish whose name by itself gives their full description, several varieties of porgy or gilthead (some banded gilthead with fins variously blue and yellow, some with horizontal heraldic bars and enhanced by a black strip around their caudal area, some with color zones and elegantly corseted in their six waistbands), trumpetfish with flutelike beaks that looked like genuine seafaring woodcocks and were sometimes a meter long, Japanese salamanders, serpentine moray eels from the genus Echidna that were six feet long with sharp little eyes and a huge mouth bristling with teeth; etc.

Our wonderment stayed at an all-time fever pitch.

Our exclamations were endless.

Ned identified the fish, Conseil classified them, and as for me, I was in ecstasy over the verve of their movements and the beauty of their forms.

Never before had I been given the chance to glimpse these animals alive and at large in their native element.

Given such a complete collection from the seas of Japan and China, I won't mention every variety that passed before our dazzled eyes.

More numerous than birds in the air, these fish raced right up to us, no doubt attracted by the brilliant glow of our electric beacon.

Suddenly daylight appeared in the lounge.

The sheet-iron panels slid shut.

The magical vision disappeared.

But for a good while I kept dreaming away, until the moment my eyes focused on the instruments hanging on the wall.

The compass still showed our heading as east-northeast, the pressure gauge indicated a pressure of five atmospheres (corresponding to a depth of fifty meters), and the electric log gave our speed as fifteen miles per hour.

I waited for Captain Nemo.

But he didn't appear.

The clock marked the hour of five.

Ned Land and Conseil returned to their cabin.

As for me, I repaired to my stateroom.

There I found dinner ready for me.

It consisted of turtle soup made from the daintiest hawksbill, a red mullet with white, slightly flaky flesh, whose liver, when separately prepared, makes delicious eating, plus loin of imperial angelfish, whose flavor struck me as even better than salmon.

I spent the evening in reading, writing, and thinking.

Then drowsiness overtook me, I stretched out on my eelgrass mattress, and I fell into a deep slumber, while the Nautilus glided through the swiftly flowing Black Current.

An Invitation in Writing THE NEXT DAY, November 9, I woke up only after a long, twelve-hour slumber.

Conseil, a creature of habit, came to ask "how master's night went,"

and to offer his services.

He had left his Canadian friend sleeping like a man who had never done anything else.

I let the gallant lad babble as he pleased, without giving him much in the way of a reply.

I was concerned about Captain Nemo's absence during our session the previous afternoon, and I hoped to see him again today.

Soon I had put on my clothes, which were woven from strands of seashell tissue.

More than once their composition provoked comments from Conseil.

I informed him that they were made from the smooth, silken filaments with which the fan mussel, a type of seashell quite abundant along Mediterranean beaches, attaches itself to rocks.

In olden times, fine fabrics, stockings, and gloves were made from such filaments, because they were both very soft and very warm.

So the Nautilus's crew could dress themselves at little cost, without needing a thing from cotton growers, sheep, or silkworms on shore.

As soon as I was dressed, I made my way to the main lounge.

It was deserted.

I dove into studying the conchological treasures amassed inside the glass cases.

I also investigated the huge plant albums that were filled with the rarest marine herbs, which, although they were pressed and dried, still kept their wonderful colors.

Among these valuable water plants, I noted various seaweed: some Cladostephus verticillatus, peacock's tails, fig-leafed caulerpa, grain-bearing beauty bushes, delicate rosetangle tinted scarlet, sea colander arranged into fan shapes, mermaid's cups that looked like the caps of squat mushrooms and for years had been classified among the zoophytes; in short, a complete series of algae.

The entire day passed without my being honored by a visit from Captain Nemo.

The panels in the lounge didn't open.

Perhaps they didn't want us to get tired of these beautiful things.

The Nautilus kept to an east-northeasterly heading, a speed of twelve miles per hour, and a depth between fifty and sixty meters.

Next day, November 10: the same neglect, the same solitude.

I didn't see a soul from the crew.

Ned and Conseil spent the better part of the day with me.

They were astonished at the captain's inexplicable absence.

Was this eccentric man ill?

Did he want to change his plans concerning us?

But after all, as Conseil noted, we enjoyed complete freedom, we were daintily and abundantly fed.

Our host had kept to the terms of his agreement.

We couldn't complain, and moreover the very uniqueness of our situation had such generous rewards in store for us, we had no grounds for criticism.

That day I started my diary of these adventures, which has enabled me to narrate them with the most scrupulous accuracy; and one odd detail: I wrote it on paper manufactured from marine eelgrass.

Early in the morning on November 11, fresh air poured through the Nautilus's interior, informing me that we had returned to the surface of the ocean to renew our oxygen supply.

I headed for the central companionway and climbed onto the platform.

It was six o'clock.

I found the weather overcast, the sea gray but calm.

Hardly a billow.

I hoped to encounter Captain Nemo there--would he come?

I saw only the helmsman imprisoned in his glass-windowed pilothouse.

Seated on the ledge furnished by the hull of the skiff, I inhaled the sea's salty aroma with great pleasure.

Little by little, the mists were dispersed under the action of the sun's rays.

The radiant orb cleared the eastern horizon.

Under its gaze, the sea caught on fire like a trail of gunpowder.

Scattered on high, the clouds were colored in bright, wonderfully shaded hues, and numerous "ladyfingers"

warned of daylong winds.* *Author's Note: "Ladyfingers"

are small, thin, white clouds with ragged edges.

But what were mere winds to this Nautilus, which no storms could intimidate!

So I was marveling at this delightful sunrise, so life-giving and cheerful, when I heard someone climbing onto the platform.

I was prepared to greet Captain Nemo, but it was his chief officer who appeared--whom I had already met during our first visit with the captain.

He advanced over the platform, not seeming to notice my presence.

A powerful spyglass to his eye, he scrutinized every point of the horizon with the utmost care.

Then, his examination over, he approached the hatch and pronounced a phrase whose exact wording follows below.

I remember it because, every morning, it was repeated under the same circumstances.

It ran like this: "Nautron respoc lorni virch."

What it meant I was unable to say.

These words pronounced, the chief officer went below again.

I thought the Nautilus was about to resume its underwater navigating.

So I went down the hatch and back through the gangways to my stateroom.

Five days passed in this way with no change in our situation.

Every morning I climbed onto the platform.

The same phrase was pronounced by the same individual.

Captain Nemo did not appear.

I was pursuing the policy that we had seen the last of him, when on November 16, while reentering my stateroom with Ned and Conseil, I found a note addressed to me on the table.

I opened it impatiently.

It was written in a script that was clear and neat but a bit "Old English"

in style, its characters reminding me of German calligraphy.

The note was worded as follows: Professor Aronnax Aboard the Nautilus November 16, 1867 Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax on a hunting trip that will take place tomorrow morning in his Crespo Island forests.

He hopes nothing will prevent the professor from attending, and he looks forward with pleasure to the professor's companions joining him.

CAPTAIN NEMO, Commander of the Nautilus.

"A hunting trip!"

Ned exclaimed.

"And in his forests on Crespo Island!"

Conseil added.

"But does this mean the old boy goes ashore?"

Ned Land went on.

"That seems to be the gist of it,"

I said, rereading the letter.

"Well, we've got to accept!"

the Canadian answered.

"Once we're on solid ground, we'll figure out a course of action.

Besides, it wouldn't pain me to eat a couple slices of fresh venison!"

Without trying to reconcile the contradictions between Captain Nemo's professed horror of continents or islands and his invitation to go hunting in a forest, I was content to reply: "First let's look into this Crespo Island."

I consulted the world map; and in latitude 32 degrees 40' north and longitude 167 degrees 50' west, I found an islet that had been discovered in 1801 by Captain Crespo, which old Spanish charts called Rocca de la Plata, in other words, "Silver Rock."

So we were about 1,800 miles from our starting point, and by a slight change of heading, the Nautilus was bringing us back toward the southeast.

I showed my companions this small, stray rock in the middle of the north Pacific.

"If Captain Nemo does sometimes go ashore,"

I told them, "at least he only picks desert islands!"

Ned Land shook his head without replying; then he and Conseil left me.

After supper was served me by the mute and emotionless steward, I fell asleep; but not without some anxieties.

When I woke up the next day, November 17, I sensed that the Nautilus was completely motionless.

I dressed hurriedly and entered the main lounge.

Captain Nemo was there waiting for me.

He stood up, bowed, and asked if it suited me to come along.

Since he made no allusion to his absence the past eight days, I also refrained from mentioning it, and I simply answered that my companions and I were ready to go with him.

"Only, sir,"

I added, "I'll take the liberty of addressing a question to you."

"Address away, Professor Aronnax, and if I'm able to answer, I will."

"Well then, captain, how is it that you've severed all ties with the shore, yet you own forests on Crespo Island?"

"Professor,"

the captain answered me, "these forests of mine don't bask in the heat and light of the sun.

They aren't frequented by lions, tigers, panthers, or other quadrupeds.

They're known only to me.

They grow only for me.

These forests aren't on land, they're actual underwater forests."

"Underwater forests!"

I exclaimed.

"Yes, professor."

"And you're offering to take me to them?"

"Precisely."

"On foot?"

"Without getting your feet wet."

"While hunting?"

"While hunting."

"Rifles in hand?"

"Rifles in hand."

I stared at the Nautilus's commander with an air anything but flattering to the man.

"Assuredly,"

I said to myself, "he's contracted some mental illness.

He's had a fit that's lasted eight days and isn't over even yet.

What a shame!

I liked him better eccentric than insane!"

These thoughts were clearly readable on my face; but Captain Nemo remained content with inviting me to follow him, and I did so like a man resigned to the worst.

We arrived at the dining room, where we found breakfast served.

"Professor Aronnax,"

the captain told me, "I beg you to share my breakfast without formality.

We can chat while we eat.

Because, although I promised you a stroll in my forests, I made no pledge to arrange for your encountering a restaurant there.

Accordingly, eat your breakfast like a man who'll probably eat dinner only when it's extremely late."

I did justice to this meal.

It was made up of various fish and some slices of sea cucumber, that praiseworthy zoophyte, all garnished with such highly appetizing seaweed as the Porphyra laciniata and the Laurencia primafetida.

Our beverage consisted of clear water to which, following the captain's example, I added some drops of a fermented liquor extracted by the Kamchatka process from the seaweed known by name as Rhodymenia palmata.

At first Captain Nemo ate without pronouncing a single word.

Then he told me: "Professor, when I proposed that you go hunting in my Crespo forests, you thought I was contradicting myself.

When I informed you that it was an issue of underwater forests, you thought I'd gone insane.

Professor, you must never make snap judgments about your fellow man."

"But, captain, believe me--"

"Kindly listen to me, and you'll see if you have grounds for accusing me of insanity or self-contradiction."

"I'm all attention."

"Professor, you know as well as I do that a man can live underwater so long as he carries with him his own supply of breathable air.

For underwater work projects, the workman wears a waterproof suit with his head imprisoned in a metal capsule, while he receives air from above by means of force pumps and flow regulators."

"That's the standard equipment for a diving suit,"

I said.

"Correct, but under such conditions the man has no freedom.

He's attached to a pump that sends him air through an india-rubber hose; it's an actual chain that fetters him to the shore, and if we were to be bound in this way to the Nautilus, we couldn't go far either."

"Then how do you break free?"

I asked.

"We use the Rouquayrol-Denayrouze device, invented by two of your fellow countrymen but refined by me for my own special uses, thereby enabling you to risk these new physiological conditions without suffering any organic disorders.

It consists of a tank built from heavy sheet iron in which I store air under a pressure of fifty atmospheres.

This tank is fastened to the back by means of straps, like a soldier's knapsack.

Its top part forms a box where the air is regulated by a bellows mechanism and can be released only at its proper tension.

In the Rouquayrol device that has been in general use, two india-rubber hoses leave this box and feed to a kind of tent that imprisons the operator's nose and mouth; one hose is for the entrance of air to be inhaled, the other for the exit of air to be exhaled, and the tongue closes off the former or the latter depending on the breather's needs.

But in my case, since I face considerable pressures at the bottom of the sea, I needed to enclose my head in a copper sphere, like those found on standard diving suits, and the two hoses for inhalation and exhalation now feed to that sphere."

"That's perfect, Captain Nemo, but the air you carry must be quickly depleted; and once it contains no more than 15% oxygen, it becomes unfit for breathing."

"Surely, but as I told you, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus's pumps enable me to store air under considerable pressure, and given this circumstance, the tank on my diving equipment can supply breathable air for nine or ten hours."

"I've no more objections to raise,"

I replied.

"I'll only ask you, captain: how can you light your way at the bottom of the ocean?"

"With the Ruhmkorff device, Professor Aronnax.

If the first is carried on the back, the second is fastened to the belt.

It consists of a Bunsen battery that I activate not with potassium dichromate but with sodium.

An induction coil gathers the electricity generated and directs it to a specially designed lantern.

In this lantern one finds a glass spiral that contains only a residue of carbon dioxide gas.

When the device is operating, this gas becomes luminous and gives off a continuous whitish light.

Thus provided for, I breathe and I see."

"Captain Nemo, to my every objection you give such crushing answers, I'm afraid to entertain a single doubt.

However, though I have no choice but to accept both the Rouquayrol and Ruhmkorff devices, I'd like to register some reservations about the rifle with which you'll equip me."

"But it isn't a rifle that uses gunpowder,"

the captain replied.

"Then it's an air gun?"

"Surely.

How can I make gunpowder on my ship when I have no saltpeter, sulfur, or charcoal?"

"Even so,"

I replied, "to fire underwater in a medium that's 855 times denser than air, you'd have to overcome considerable resistance."

"That doesn't necessarily follow.

There are certain Fulton-style guns perfected by the Englishmen Philippe-Coles and Burley, the Frenchman Furcy, and the Italian Landi; they're equipped with a special system of airtight fastenings and can fire in underwater conditions.

But I repeat: having no gunpowder, I've replaced it with air at high pressure, which is abundantly supplied me by the Nautilus's pumps."

"But this air must be swiftly depleted."

"Well, in a pinch can't my Rouquayrol tank supply me with more?

All I have to do is draw it from an ad hoc spigot.* Besides, Professor Aronnax, you'll see for yourself that during these underwater hunting trips, we make no great expenditure of either air or bullets."

*Latin: a spigot "just for that purpose."

Ed.

"But it seems to me that in this semidarkness, amid this liquid that's so dense in comparison to the atmosphere, a gunshot couldn't carry far and would prove fatal only with difficulty!"

"On the contrary, sir, with this rifle every shot is fatal; and as soon as the animal is hit, no matter how lightly, it falls as if struck by lightning."

"Why?"

"Because this rifle doesn't shoot ordinary bullets but little glass capsules invented by the Austrian chemist Leniebroek, and I have a considerable supply of them.

These glass capsules are covered with a strip of steel and weighted with a lead base; they're genuine little Leyden jars charged with high-voltage electricity.

They go off at the slightest impact, and the animal, no matter how strong, drops dead.

I might add that these capsules are no bigger than number 4 shot, and the chamber of any ordinary rifle could hold ten of them."

"I'll quit debating,"

I replied, getting up from the table.

"And all that's left is for me to shoulder my rifle.

So where you go, I'll go."

Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus's stern, and passing by Ned and Conseil's cabin, I summoned my two companions, who instantly followed us.

Then we arrived at a cell located within easy access of the engine room; in this cell we were to get dressed for our stroll.

Strolling the Plains THIS CELL, properly speaking, was the Nautilus's arsenal and wardrobe.

Hanging from its walls, a dozen diving outfits were waiting for anybody who wanted to take a stroll.

After seeing these, Ned Land exhibited an obvious distaste for the idea of putting one on.

"But my gallant Ned,"

I told him, "the forests of Crespo Island are simply underwater forests!"

"Oh great!"

put in the disappointed harpooner, watching his dreams of fresh meat fade away.

"And you, Professor Aronnax, are you going to stick yourself inside these clothes?"

"It has to be, Mr.

Ned."

"Have it your way, sir,"

the harpooner replied, shrugging his shoulders.

"But speaking for myself, I'll never get into those things unless they force me!"

"No one will force you, Mr.

Land,"

Captain Nemo said.

"And is Conseil going to risk it?"

Ned asked.

"Where master goes, I go,"

Conseil replied.

At the captain's summons, two crewmen came to help us put on these heavy, waterproof clothes, made from seamless india rubber and expressly designed to bear considerable pressures.

They were like suits of armor that were both yielding and resistant, you might say.

These clothes consisted of jacket and pants.

The pants ended in bulky footwear adorned with heavy lead soles.

The fabric of the jacket was reinforced with copper mail that shielded the chest, protected it from the water's pressure, and allowed the lungs to function freely; the sleeves ended in supple gloves that didn't impede hand movements.

These perfected diving suits, it was easy to see, were a far cry from such misshapen costumes as the cork breastplates, leather jumpers, seagoing tunics, barrel helmets, etc., invented and acclaimed in the 18th century.

Conseil and I were soon dressed in these diving suits, as were Captain Nemo and one of his companions--a herculean type who must have been prodigiously strong.

All that remained was to encase one's head in its metal sphere.

But before proceeding with this operation, I asked the captain for permission to examine the rifles set aside for us.

One of the Nautilus's men presented me with a streamlined rifle whose butt was boilerplate steel, hollow inside, and of fairly large dimensions.

This served as a tank for the compressed air, which a trigger-operated valve could release into the metal chamber.

In a groove where the butt was heaviest, a cartridge clip held some twenty electric bullets that, by means of a spring, automatically took their places in the barrel of the rifle.

As soon as one shot had been fired, another was ready to go off.

"Captain Nemo,"

I said, "this is an ideal, easy-to-use weapon.

I ask only to put it to the test.

But how will we reach the bottom of the sea?"

"Right now, professor, the Nautilus is aground in ten meters of water, and we've only to depart."

"But how will we set out?"

"You'll see."

Captain Nemo inserted his cranium into its spherical headgear.

Conseil and I did the same, but not without hearing the Canadian toss us a sarcastic "happy hunting."

On top, the suit ended in a collar of threaded copper onto which the metal helmet was screwed.

Three holes, protected by heavy glass, allowed us to see in any direction with simply a turn of the head inside the sphere.

Placed on our backs, the Rouquayrol device went into operation as soon as it was in position, and for my part, I could breathe with ease.

The Ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt, my rifle in hand, I was ready to go forth.

But in all honesty, while imprisoned in these heavy clothes and nailed to the deck by my lead soles, it was impossible for me to take a single step.

But this circumstance had been foreseen, because I felt myself propelled into a little room adjoining the wardrobe.

Towed in the same way, my companions went with me.

I heard a door with watertight seals close after us, and we were surrounded by profound darkness.

After some minutes a sharp hissing reached my ears.

I felt a distinct sensation of cold rising from my feet to my chest.

Apparently a stopcock inside the boat was letting in water from outside, which overran us and soon filled up the room.

Contrived in the Nautilus's side, a second door then opened.

We were lit by a subdued light.

An instant later our feet were treading the bottom of the sea.

And now, how can I convey the impressions left on me by this stroll under the waters.

Words are powerless to describe such wonders!

When even the painter's brush can't depict the effects unique to the liquid element, how can the writer's pen hope to reproduce them?

Captain Nemo walked in front, and his companion followed us a few steps to the rear.

Conseil and I stayed next to each other, as if daydreaming that through our metal carapaces, a little polite conversation might still be possible!

Already I no longer felt the bulkiness of my clothes, footwear, and air tank, nor the weight of the heavy sphere inside which my head was rattling like an almond in its shell.

Once immersed in water, all these objects lost a part of their weight equal to the weight of the liquid they displaced, and thanks to this law of physics discovered by Archimedes, I did just fine.

I was no longer an inert mass, and I had, comparatively speaking, great freedom of movement.

Lighting up the seafloor even thirty feet beneath the surface of the ocean, the sun astonished me with its power.

The solar rays easily crossed this aqueous mass and dispersed its dark colors.

I could easily distinguish objects 100 meters away.

Farther on, the bottom was tinted with fine shades of ultramarine; then, off in the distance, it turned blue and faded in the midst of a hazy darkness.

Truly, this water surrounding me was just a kind of air, denser than the atmosphere on land but almost as transparent.

Above me I could see the calm surface of the ocean.

We were walking on sand that was fine-grained and smooth, not wrinkled like beach sand, which preserves the impressions left by the waves.

This dazzling carpet was a real mirror, throwing back the sun's rays with startling intensity.

The outcome: an immense vista of reflections that penetrated every liquid molecule.

Will anyone believe me if I assert that at this thirty-foot depth, I could see as if it was broad daylight?

For a quarter of an hour, I trod this blazing sand, which was strewn with tiny crumbs of seashell.

Looming like a long reef, the Nautilus's hull disappeared little by little, but when night fell in the midst of the waters, the ship's beacon would surely facilitate our return on board, since its rays carried with perfect distinctness.

This effect is difficult to understand for anyone who has never seen light beams so sharply defined on shore.

There the dust that saturates the air gives such rays the appearance of a luminous fog; but above water as well as underwater, shafts of electric light are transmitted with incomparable clarity.

Meanwhile we went ever onward, and these vast plains of sand seemed endless.

My hands parted liquid curtains that closed again behind me, and my footprints faded swiftly under the water's pressure.

Soon, scarcely blurred by their distance from us, the forms of some objects took shape before my eyes.

I recognized the lower slopes of some magnificent rocks carpeted by the finest zoophyte specimens, and right off, I was struck by an effect unique to this medium.

By then it was ten o'clock in the morning.

The sun's rays hit the surface of the waves at a fairly oblique angle, decomposing by refraction as though passing through a prism; and when this light came in contact with flowers, rocks, buds, seashells, and polyps, the edges of these objects were shaded with all seven hues of the solar spectrum.

This riot of rainbow tints was a wonder, a feast for the eyes: a genuine kaleidoscope of red, green, yellow, orange, violet, indigo, and blue; in short, the whole palette of a color-happy painter!

If only I had been able to share with Conseil the intense sensations rising in my brain, competing with him in exclamations of wonderment!

If only I had known, like Captain Nemo and his companion, how to exchange thoughts by means of prearranged signals!

So, for lack of anything better, I talked to myself: I declaimed inside this copper box that topped my head, spending more air on empty words than was perhaps advisable.

Conseil, like me, had stopped before this splendid sight.

Obviously, in the presence of these zoophyte and mollusk specimens, the fine lad was classifying his head off.

Polyps and echinoderms abounded on the seafloor: various isis coral, cornularian coral living in isolation, tufts of virginal genus Oculina formerly known by the name "white coral,"

prickly fungus coral in the shape of mushrooms, sea anemone holding on by their muscular disks, providing a literal flowerbed adorned by jellyfish from the genus Porpita wearing collars of azure tentacles, and starfish that spangled the sand, including veinlike feather stars from the genus Asterophyton that were like fine lace embroidered by the hands of water nymphs, their festoons swaying to the faint undulations caused by our walking.

It filled me with real chagrin to crush underfoot the gleaming mollusk samples that littered the seafloor by the thousands: concentric comb shells, hammer shells, coquina (seashells that actually hop around), top-shell snails, red helmet shells, angel-wing conchs, sea hares, and so many other exhibits from this inexhaustible ocean.

But we had to keep walking, and we went forward while overhead there scudded schools of Portuguese men-of-war that let their ultramarine tentacles drift in their wakes, medusas whose milky white or dainty pink parasols were festooned with azure tassels and shaded us from the sun's rays, plus jellyfish of the species Pelagia panopyra that, in the dark, would have strewn our path with phosphorescent glimmers!

All these wonders I glimpsed in the space of a quarter of a mile, barely pausing, following Captain Nemo whose gestures kept beckoning me onward.

Soon the nature of the seafloor changed.

The plains of sand were followed by a bed of that viscous slime Americans call "ooze,"

which is composed exclusively of seashells rich in limestone or silica.

Then we crossed a prairie of algae, open-sea plants that the waters hadn't yet torn loose, whose vegetation grew in wild profusion.

Soft to the foot, these densely textured lawns would have rivaled the most luxuriant carpets woven by the hand of man.

But while this greenery was sprawling under our steps, it didn't neglect us overhead.

The surface of the water was crisscrossed by a floating arbor of marine plants belonging to that superabundant algae family that numbers more than 2,000 known species.

I saw long ribbons of fucus drifting above me, some globular, others tubular: Laurencia, Cladostephus with the slenderest foliage, Rhodymenia palmata resembling the fan shapes of cactus.

I observed that green-colored plants kept closer to the surface of the sea, while reds occupied a medium depth, which left blacks and browns in charge of designing gardens and flowerbeds in the ocean's lower strata.

These algae are a genuine prodigy of creation, one of the wonders of world flora.

This family produces both the biggest and smallest vegetables in the world.

Because, just as 40,000 near-invisible buds have been counted in one five-square-millimeter space, so also have fucus plants been gathered that were over 500 meters long!

We had been gone from the Nautilus for about an hour and a half.

It was almost noon.

I spotted this fact in the perpendicularity of the sun's rays, which were no longer refracted.

The magic of these solar colors disappeared little by little, with emerald and sapphire shades vanishing from our surroundings altogether.

We walked with steady steps that rang on the seafloor with astonishing intensity.

The tiniest sounds were transmitted with a speed to which the ear is unaccustomed on shore.

In fact, water is a better conductor of sound than air, and under the waves noises carry four times as fast.

Just then the seafloor began to slope sharply downward.

The light took on a uniform hue.

We reached a depth of 100 meters, by which point we were undergoing a pressure of ten atmospheres.

But my diving clothes were built along such lines that I never suffered from this pressure.

I felt only a certain tightness in the joints of my fingers, and even this discomfort soon disappeared.

As for the exhaustion bound to accompany a two-hour stroll in such unfamiliar trappings--it was nil.

Helped by the water, my movements were executed with startling ease.

Arriving at this 300-foot depth, I still detected the sun's rays, but just barely.

Their intense brilliance had been followed by a reddish twilight, a midpoint between day and night.

But we could see well enough to find our way, and it still wasn't necessary to activate the Ruhmkorff device.

Just then Captain Nemo stopped.

He waited until I joined him, then he pointed a finger at some dark masses outlined in the shadows a short distance away.

"It's the forest of Crespo Island,"

I thought; and I was not mistaken.

An Underwater Forest WE HAD FINALLY arrived on the outskirts of this forest, surely one of the finest in Captain Nemo's immense domains.

He regarded it as his own and had laid the same claim to it that, in the first days of the world, the first men had to their forests on land.

Besides, who else could dispute his ownership of this underwater property?

What other, bolder pioneer would come, ax in hand, to clear away its dark underbrush?

This forest was made up of big treelike plants, and when we entered beneath their huge arches, my eyes were instantly struck by the unique arrangement of their branches--an arrangement that I had never before encountered.

None of the weeds carpeting the seafloor, none of the branches bristling from the shrubbery, crept, or leaned, or stretched on a horizontal plane.

They all rose right up toward the surface of the ocean.

Every filament or ribbon, no matter how thin, stood ramrod straight.

Fucus plants and creepers were growing in stiff perpendicular lines, governed by the density of the element that generated them.

After I parted them with my hands, these otherwise motionless plants would shoot right back to their original positions.

It was the regime of verticality.

I soon grew accustomed to this bizarre arrangement, likewise to the comparative darkness surrounding us.

The seafloor in this forest was strewn with sharp chunks of stone that were hard to avoid.

Here the range of underwater flora seemed pretty comprehensive to me, as well as more abundant than it might have been in the arctic or tropical zones, where such exhibits are less common.

But for a few minutes I kept accidentally confusing the two kingdoms, mistaking zoophytes for water plants, animals for vegetables.

And who hasn't made the same blunder?

Flora and fauna are so closely associated in the underwater world!

I observed that all these exhibits from the vegetable kingdom were attached to the seafloor by only the most makeshift methods.

They had no roots and didn't care which solid objects secured them, sand, shells, husks, or pebbles; they didn't ask their hosts for sustenance, just a point of purchase.

These plants are entirely self-propagating, and the principle of their existence lies in the water that sustains and nourishes them.

In place of leaves, most of them sprouted blades of unpredictable shape, which were confined to a narrow gamut of colors consisting only of pink, crimson, green, olive, tan, and brown.

There I saw again, but not yet pressed and dried like the Nautilus's specimens, some peacock's tails spread open like fans to stir up a cooling breeze, scarlet rosetangle, sea tangle stretching out their young and edible shoots, twisting strings of kelp from the genus Nereocystis that bloomed to a height of fifteen meters, bouquets of mermaid's cups whose stems grew wider at the top, and a number of other open-sea plants, all without flowers.

"It's an odd anomaly in this bizarre element!"

as one witty naturalist puts it.

"The animal kingdom blossoms, and the vegetable kingdom doesn't!"

These various types of shrubbery were as big as trees in the temperate zones; in the damp shade between them, there were clustered actual bushes of moving flowers, hedges of zoophytes in which there grew stony coral striped with twisting furrows, yellowish sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia with translucent tentacles, plus anemone with grassy tufts from the genus Zoantharia; and to complete the illusion, minnows flitted from branch to branch like a swarm of hummingbirds, while there rose underfoot, like a covey of snipe, yellow fish from the genus Lepisocanthus with bristling jaws and sharp scales, flying gurnards, and pinecone fish.

Near one o'clock, Captain Nemo gave the signal to halt.

Speaking for myself, I was glad to oblige, and we stretched out beneath an arbor of winged kelp, whose long thin tendrils stood up like arrows.

This short break was a delight.

It lacked only the charm of conversation.

But it was impossible to speak, impossible to reply.

I simply nudged my big copper headpiece against Conseil's headpiece.

I saw a happy gleam in the gallant lad's eyes, and to communicate his pleasure, he jiggled around inside his carapace in the world's silliest way.

After four hours of strolling, I was quite astonished not to feel any intense hunger.

What kept my stomach in such a good mood I'm unable to say.

But, in exchange, I experienced that irresistible desire for sleep that comes over every diver.

Accordingly, my eyes soon closed behind their heavy glass windows and I fell into an uncontrollable doze, which until then I had been able to fight off only through the movements of our walking.

Captain Nemo and his muscular companion were already stretched out in this clear crystal, setting us a fine naptime example.

How long I was sunk in this torpor I cannot estimate; but when I awoke, it seemed as if the sun were settling toward the horizon.

Captain Nemo was already up, and I had started to stretch my limbs, when an unexpected apparition brought me sharply to my feet.

A few paces away, a monstrous, meter-high sea spider was staring at me with beady eyes, poised to spring at me.

Although my diving suit was heavy enough to protect me from this animal's bites, I couldn't keep back a shudder of horror.

Just then Conseil woke up, together with the Nautilus's sailor.

Captain Nemo alerted his companion to this hideous crustacean, which a swing of the rifle butt quickly brought down, and I watched the monster's horrible legs writhing in dreadful convulsions.

This encounter reminded me that other, more daunting animals must be lurking in these dark reaches, and my diving suit might not be adequate protection against their attacks.

Such thoughts hadn't previously crossed my mind, and I was determined to keep on my guard.

Meanwhile I had assumed this rest period would be the turning point in our stroll, but I was mistaken; and instead of heading back to the Nautilus, Captain Nemo continued his daring excursion.

The seafloor kept sinking, and its significantly steeper slope took us to greater depths.

It must have been nearly three o'clock when we reached a narrow valley gouged between high, vertical walls and located 150 meters down.

Thanks to the perfection of our equipment, we had thus gone ninety meters below the limit that nature had, until then, set on man's underwater excursions.

I say 150 meters, although I had no instruments for estimating this distance.

But I knew that the sun's rays, even in the clearest seas, could reach no deeper.

So at precisely this point the darkness became profound.

Not a single object was visible past ten paces.

Consequently, I had begun to grope my way when suddenly I saw the glow of an intense white light.

Captain Nemo had just activated his electric device.

His companion did likewise.

Conseil and I followed suit.

By turning a switch, I established contact between the induction coil and the glass spiral, and the sea, lit up by our four lanterns, was illuminated for a radius of twenty-five meters.

Captain Nemo continued to plummet into the dark depths of this forest, whose shrubbery grew ever more sparse.

I observed that vegetable life was disappearing more quickly than animal life.

The open-sea plants had already left behind the increasingly arid seafloor, where a prodigious number of animals were still swarming: zoophytes, articulates, mollusks, and fish.

While we were walking, I thought the lights of our Ruhmkorff devices would automatically attract some inhabitants of these dark strata.

But if they did approach us, at least they kept at a distance regrettable from the hunter's standpoint.

Several times I saw Captain Nemo stop and take aim with his rifle; then, after sighting down its barrel for a few seconds, he would straighten up and resume his walk.

Finally, at around four o'clock, this marvelous excursion came to an end.

A wall of superb rocks stood before us, imposing in its sheer mass: a pile of gigantic stone blocks, an enormous granite cliffside pitted with dark caves but not offering a single gradient we could climb up.

This was the underpinning of Crespo Island.

This was land.

The captain stopped suddenly.

A gesture from him brought us to a halt, and however much I wanted to clear this wall, I had to stop.

Here ended the domains of Captain Nemo.

He had no desire to pass beyond them.

Farther on lay a part of the globe he would no longer tread underfoot.

Our return journey began.

Captain Nemo resumed the lead in our little band, always heading forward without hesitation.

I noted that we didn't follow the same path in returning to the Nautilus.

This new route, very steep and hence very arduous, quickly took us close to the surface of the sea.

But this return to the upper strata wasn't so sudden that decompression took place too quickly, which could have led to serious organic disorders and given us those internal injuries so fatal to divers.

With great promptness, the light reappeared and grew stronger; and the refraction of the sun, already low on the horizon, again ringed the edges of various objects with the entire color spectrum.

At a depth of ten meters, we walked amid a swarm of small fish from every species, more numerous than birds in the air, more agile too; but no aquatic game worthy of a gunshot had yet been offered to our eyes.

Just then I saw the captain's weapon spring to his shoulder and track a moving object through the bushes.

A shot went off, I heard a faint hissing, and an animal dropped a few paces away, literally struck by lightning.

It was a magnificent sea otter from the genus Enhydra, the only exclusively marine quadruped.

One and a half meters long, this otter had to be worth a good high price.

Its coat, chestnut brown above and silver below, would have made one of those wonderful fur pieces so much in demand in the Russian and Chinese markets; the fineness and luster of its pelt guaranteed that it would go for at least 2,000 francs.

I was full of wonderment at this unusual mammal, with its circular head adorned by short ears, its round eyes, its white whiskers like those on a cat, its webbed and clawed feet, its bushy tail.

Hunted and trapped by fishermen, this valuable carnivore has become extremely rare, and it takes refuge chiefly in the northernmost parts of the Pacific, where in all likelihood its species will soon be facing extinction.

Captain Nemo's companion picked up the animal, loaded it on his shoulder, and we took to the trail again.

For an hour plains of sand unrolled before our steps.

Often the seafloor rose to within two meters of the surface of the water.

I could then see our images clearly mirrored on the underside of the waves, but reflected upside down: above us there appeared an identical band that duplicated our every movement and gesture; in short, a perfect likeness of the quartet near which it walked, but with heads down and feet in the air.

Another unusual effect.

Heavy clouds passed above us, forming and fading swiftly.

But after thinking it over, I realized that these so-called clouds were caused simply by the changing densities of the long ground swells, and I even spotted the foaming "white caps"

that their breaking crests were proliferating over the surface of the water.

Lastly, I couldn't help seeing the actual shadows of large birds passing over our heads, swiftly skimming the surface of the sea.

On this occasion I witnessed one of the finest gunshots ever to thrill the marrow of a hunter.

A large bird with a wide wingspan, quite clearly visible, approached and hovered over us.

When it was just a few meters above the waves, Captain Nemo's companion took aim and fired.

The animal dropped, electrocuted, and its descent brought it within reach of our adroit hunter, who promptly took possession of it.

It was an albatross of the finest species, a wonderful specimen of these open-sea fowl.

This incident did not interrupt our walk.

For two hours we were sometimes led over plains of sand, sometimes over prairies of seaweed that were quite arduous to cross.

In all honesty, I was dead tired by the time I spotted a hazy glow half a mile away, cutting through the darkness of the waters.

It was the Nautilus's beacon.

Within twenty minutes we would be on board, and there I could breathe easy again--because my tank's current air supply seemed to be quite low in oxygen.

But I was reckoning without an encounter that slightly delayed our arrival.

I was lagging behind some twenty paces when I saw Captain Nemo suddenly come back toward me.

With his powerful hands he sent me buckling to the ground, while his companion did the same to Conseil.

At first I didn't know what to make of this sudden assault, but I was reassured to observe the captain lying motionless beside me.

I was stretched out on the seafloor directly beneath some bushes of algae, when I raised my head and spied two enormous masses hurtling by, throwing off phosphorescent glimmers.

My blood turned cold in my veins!

I saw that we were under threat from a fearsome pair of sharks.

They were blue sharks, dreadful man-eaters with enormous tails, dull, glassy stares, and phosphorescent matter oozing from holes around their snouts.

They were like monstrous fireflies that could thoroughly pulverize a man in their iron jaws!

I don't know if Conseil was busy with their classification, but as for me, I looked at their silver bellies, their fearsome mouths bristling with teeth, from a viewpoint less than scientific-- more as a victim than as a professor of natural history.

Luckily these voracious animals have poor eyesight.

They went by without noticing us, grazing us with their brownish fins; and miraculously, we escaped a danger greater than encountering a tiger deep in the jungle.

Half an hour later, guided by its electric trail, we reached the Nautilus.

The outside door had been left open, and Captain Nemo closed it after we reentered the first cell.

Then he pressed a button.

I heard pumps operating within the ship, I felt the water lowering around me, and in a few moments the cell was completely empty.

The inside door opened, and we passed into the wardrobe.

There our diving suits were removed, not without difficulty; and utterly exhausted, faint from lack of food and rest, I repaired to my stateroom, full of wonder at this startling excursion on the bottom of the sea.

Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific BY THE NEXT MORNING, November 18, I was fully recovered from my exhaustion of the day before, and I climbed onto the platform just as the Nautilus's chief officer was pronouncing his daily phrase.

It then occurred to me that these words either referred to the state of the sea, or that they meant: "There's nothing in sight."

And in truth, the ocean was deserted.

Not a sail on the horizon.

The tips of Crespo Island had disappeared during the night.

The sea, absorbing every color of the prism except its blue rays, reflected the latter in every direction and sported a wonderful indigo tint.

The undulating waves regularly took on the appearance of watered silk with wide stripes.

I was marveling at this magnificent ocean view when Captain Nemo appeared.

He didn't seem to notice my presence and began a series of astronomical observations.

Then, his operations finished, he went and leaned his elbows on the beacon housing, his eyes straying over the surface of the ocean.

Meanwhile some twenty of the Nautilus's sailors--all energetic, well-built fellows--climbed onto the platform.

They had come to pull up the nets left in our wake during the night.

These seamen obviously belonged to different nationalities, although indications of European physical traits could be seen in them all.

If I'm not mistaken, I recognized some Irishmen, some Frenchmen, a few Slavs, and a native of either Greece or Crete.

Even so, these men were frugal of speech and used among themselves only that bizarre dialect whose origin I couldn't even guess.

So I had to give up any notions of questioning them.

The nets were hauled on board.

They were a breed of trawl resembling those used off the Normandy coast, huge pouches held half open by a floating pole and a chain laced through the lower meshes.

Trailing in this way from these iron glove makers, the resulting receptacles scoured the ocean floor and collected every marine exhibit in their path.

That day they gathered up some unusual specimens from these fish-filled waterways: anglerfish whose comical movements qualify them for the epithet "clowns,"

black Commerson anglers equipped with their antennas, undulating triggerfish encircled by little red bands, bloated puffers whose venom is extremely insidious, some olive-hued lampreys, snipefish covered with silver scales, cutlass fish whose electrocuting power equals that of the electric eel and the electric ray, scaly featherbacks with brown crosswise bands, greenish codfish, several varieties of goby, etc.; finally, some fish of larger proportions: a one-meter jack with a prominent head, several fine bonito from the genus Scomber decked out in the colors blue and silver, and three magnificent tuna whose high speeds couldn't save them from our trawl.

I estimate that this cast of the net brought in more than 1,000 pounds of fish.

It was a fine catch but not surprising.

In essence, these nets stayed in our wake for several hours, incarcerating an entire aquatic world in prisons made of thread.

So we were never lacking in provisions of the highest quality, which the Nautilus's speed and the allure of its electric light could continually replenish.

These various exhibits from the sea were immediately lowered down the hatch in the direction of the storage lockers, some to be eaten fresh, others to be preserved.

After its fishing was finished and its air supply renewed, I thought the Nautilus would resume its underwater excursion, and I was getting ready to return to my stateroom, when Captain Nemo turned to me and said without further preamble: "Look at this ocean, professor!

Doesn't it have the actual gift of life?

Doesn't it experience both anger and affection?

Last evening it went to sleep just as we did, and there it is, waking up after a peaceful night!"

No hellos or good mornings for this gent!

You would have thought this eccentric individual was simply continuing a conversation we'd already started!

"See!"

he went on.

"It's waking up under the sun's caresses!

It's going to relive its daily existence!

What a fascinating field of study lies in watching the play of its organism.

It owns a pulse and arteries, it has spasms, and I side with the scholarly Commander Maury, who discovered that it has a circulation as real as the circulation of blood in animals."

I'm sure that Captain Nemo expected no replies from me, and it seemed pointless to pitch in with "Ah yes,"

"Exactly,"

or "How right you are!"

Rather, he was simply talking to himself, with long pauses between sentences.

He was meditating out loud.

"Yes,"

he said, "the ocean owns a genuine circulation, and to start it going, the Creator of All Things has only to increase its heat, salt, and microscopic animal life.

In essence, heat creates the different densities that lead to currents and countercurrents.

Evaporation, which is nil in the High Arctic regions and very active in equatorial zones, brings about a constant interchange of tropical and polar waters.

What's more, I've detected those falling and rising currents that make up the ocean's true breathing.

I've seen a molecule of salt water heat up at the surface, sink into the depths, reach maximum density at -2 degrees centigrade, then cool off, grow lighter, and rise again.

At the poles you'll see the consequences of this phenomenon, and through this law of farseeing nature, you'll understand why water can freeze only at the surface!"

As the captain was finishing his sentence, I said to myself: "The pole!

Is this brazen individual claiming he'll take us even to that location?"

Meanwhile the captain fell silent and stared at the element he had studied so thoroughly and unceasingly.

Then, going on: "Salts,"

he said, "fill the sea in considerable quantities, professor, and if you removed all its dissolved saline content, you'd create a mass measuring 4,500,000 cubic leagues, which if it were spread all over the globe, would form a layer more than ten meters high.

And don't think that the presence of these salts is due merely to some whim of nature.

No.

They make ocean water less open to evaporation and prevent winds from carrying off excessive amounts of steam, which, when condensing, would submerge the temperate zones.

Salts play a leading role, the role of stabilizer for the general ecology of the globe!"

Captain Nemo stopped, straightened up, took a few steps along the platform, and returned to me: "As for those billions of tiny animals,"

he went on, "those infusoria that live by the millions in one droplet of water, 800,000 of which are needed to weigh one milligram, their role is no less important.

They absorb the marine salts, they assimilate the solid elements in the water, and since they create coral and madrepores, they're the true builders of limestone continents!

And so, after they've finished depriving our water drop of its mineral nutrients, the droplet gets lighter, rises to the surface, there absorbs more salts left behind through evaporation, gets heavier, sinks again, and brings those tiny animals new elements to absorb.

The outcome: a double current, rising and falling, constant movement, constant life!

More intense than on land, more abundant, more infinite, such life blooms in every part of this ocean, an element fatal to man, they say, but vital to myriads of animals--and to me!"

When Captain Nemo spoke in this way, he was transfigured, and he filled me with extraordinary excitement.

"There,"

he added, "out there lies true existence!

And I can imagine the founding of nautical towns, clusters of underwater households that, like the Nautilus, would return to the surface of the sea to breathe each morning, free towns if ever there were, independent cities!

Then again, who knows whether some tyrant .

.

."

Captain Nemo finished his sentence with a vehement gesture.

Then, addressing me directly, as if to drive away an ugly thought: "Professor Aronnax,"

he asked me, "do you know the depth of the ocean floor?"

"At least, captain, I know what the major soundings tell us."

"Could you quote them to me, so I can double-check them as the need arises?"

"Here,"

I replied, "are a few of them that stick in my memory.

If I'm not mistaken, an average depth of 8,200 meters was found in the north Atlantic, and 2,500 meters in the Mediterranean.

The most remarkable soundings were taken in the south Atlantic near the 35th parallel, and they gave 12,000 meters, 14,091 meters, and 15,149 meters.

All in all, it's estimated that if the sea bottom were made level, its average depth would be about seven kilometers."

"Well, professor,"

Captain Nemo replied, "we'll show you better than that, I hope.

As for the average depth of this part of the Pacific, I'll inform you that it's a mere 4,000 meters."

This said, Captain Nemo headed to the hatch and disappeared down the ladder.

I followed him and went back to the main lounge.

The propeller was instantly set in motion, and the log gave our speed as twenty miles per hour.

Over the ensuing days and weeks, Captain Nemo was very frugal with his visits.

I saw him only at rare intervals.

His chief officer regularly fixed the positions I found reported on the chart, and in such a way that I could exactly plot the Nautilus's course.

Conseil and Land spent the long hours with me.

Conseil had told his friend about the wonders of our undersea stroll, and the Canadian was sorry he hadn't gone along.

But I hoped an opportunity would arise for a visit to the forests of Oceania.

Almost every day the panels in the lounge were open for some hours, and our eyes never tired of probing the mysteries of the underwater world.

The Nautilus's general heading was southeast, and it stayed at a depth between 100 and 150 meters.

However, from lord-knows-what whim, one day it did a diagonal dive by means of its slanting fins, reaching strata located 2,000 meters underwater.

The thermometer indicated a temperature of 4.25 degrees centigrade, which at this depth seemed to be a temperature common to all latitudes.

On November 26, at three o'clock in the morning, the Nautilus cleared the Tropic of Cancer at longitude 172 degrees.

On the 27th it passed in sight of the Hawaiian Islands, where the famous Captain Cook met his death on February 14, 1779.

By then we had fared 4,860 leagues from our starting point.

When I arrived on the platform that morning, I saw the Island of Hawaii two miles to leeward, the largest of the seven islands making up this group.

I could clearly distinguish the tilled soil on its outskirts, the various mountain chains running parallel with its coastline, and its volcanoes, crowned by Mauna Kea, whose elevation is 5,000 meters above sea level.

Among other specimens from these waterways, our nets brought up some peacock-tailed flabellarian coral, polyps flattened into stylish shapes and unique to this part of the ocean.

The Nautilus kept to its southeasterly heading.

On December 1 it cut the equator at longitude 142 degrees, and on the 4th of the same month, after a quick crossing marked by no incident, we raised the Marquesas Islands.

Three miles off, in latitude 8 degrees 57' south and longitude 139 degrees 32' west, I spotted Martin Point on Nuku Hiva, chief member of this island group that belongs to France.

I could make out only its wooded mountains on the horizon, because Captain Nemo hated to hug shore.

There our nets brought up some fine fish samples: dolphinfish with azure fins, gold tails, and flesh that's unrivaled in the entire world, wrasse from the genus Hologymnosus that were nearly denuded of scales but exquisite in flavor, knifejaws with bony beaks, yellowish albacore that were as tasty as bonito, all fish worth classifying in the ship's pantry.

After leaving these delightful islands to the protection of the French flag, the Nautilus covered about 2,000 miles from December 4 to the 11th.

Its navigating was marked by an encounter with an immense school of squid, unusual mollusks that are near neighbors of the cuttlefish.

French fishermen give them the name "cuckoldfish,"

and they belong to the class Cephalopoda, family Dibranchiata, consisting of themselves together with cuttlefish and argonauts.

The naturalists of antiquity made a special study of them, and these animals furnished many ribald figures of speech for soapbox orators in the Greek marketplace, as well as excellent dishes for the tables of rich citizens, if we're to believe Athenaeus, a Greek physician predating Galen.

It was during the night of December 9-10 that the Nautilus encountered this army of distinctly nocturnal mollusks.

They numbered in the millions.

They were migrating from the temperate zones toward zones still warmer, following the itineraries of herring and sardines.

We stared at them through our thick glass windows: they swam backward with tremendous speed, moving by means of their locomotive tubes, chasing fish and mollusks, eating the little ones, eaten by the big ones, and tossing in indescribable confusion the ten feet that nature has rooted in their heads like a hairpiece of pneumatic snakes.

Despite its speed, the Nautilus navigated for several hours in the midst of this school of animals, and its nets brought up an incalculable number, among which I recognized all nine species that Professor Orbigny has classified as native to the Pacific Ocean.

During this crossing, the sea continually lavished us with the most marvelous sights.

Its variety was infinite.

It changed its setting and decor for the mere pleasure of our eyes, and we were called upon not simply to contemplate the works of our Creator in the midst of the liquid element, but also to probe the ocean's most daunting mysteries.

During the day of December 11, I was busy reading in the main lounge.

Ned Land and Conseil were observing the luminous waters through the gaping panels.

The Nautilus was motionless.

Its ballast tanks full, it was sitting at a depth of 1,000 meters in a comparatively unpopulated region of the ocean where only larger fish put in occasional appearances.

Just then I was studying a delightful book by Jean Mac, The Servants of the Stomach, and savoring its ingenious teachings, when Conseil interrupted my reading.

"Would master kindly come here for an instant?"

he said to me in an odd voice.

"What is it, Conseil?"

"It's something that master should see."

I stood up, went, leaned on my elbows before the window, and I saw it.

In the broad electric daylight, an enormous black mass, quite motionless, hung suspended in the midst of the waters.

I observed it carefully, trying to find out the nature of this gigantic cetacean.

Then a sudden thought crossed my mind.

"A ship!"

I exclaimed.

"Yes,"

the Canadian replied, "a disabled craft that's sinking straight down!"

Ned Land was not mistaken.

We were in the presence of a ship whose severed shrouds still hung from their clasps.

Its hull looked in good condition, and it must have gone under only a few hours before.

The stumps of three masts, chopped off two feet above the deck, indicated a flooding ship that had been forced to sacrifice its masting.

But it had heeled sideways, filling completely, and it was listing to port even yet.

A sorry sight, this carcass lost under the waves, but sorrier still was the sight on its deck, where, lashed with ropes to prevent their being washed overboard, some human corpses still lay!

I counted four of them--four men, one still standing at the helm-- then a woman, halfway out of a skylight on the afterdeck, holding a child in her arms.

This woman was young.

Under the brilliant lighting of the Nautilus's rays, I could make out her features, which the water hadn't yet decomposed.

With a supreme effort, she had lifted her child above her head, and the poor little creature's arms were still twined around its mother's neck!

The postures of the four seamen seemed ghastly to me, twisted from convulsive movements, as if making a last effort to break loose from the ropes that bound them to their ship.

And the helmsman, standing alone, calmer, his face smooth and serious, his grizzled hair plastered to his brow, his hands clutching the wheel, seemed even yet to be guiding his wrecked three-master through the ocean depths!

What a scene!

We stood dumbstruck, hearts pounding, before this shipwreck caught in the act, as if it had been photographed in its final moments, so to speak!

And already I could see enormous sharks moving in, eyes ablaze, drawn by the lure of human flesh!

Meanwhile, turning, the Nautilus made a circle around the sinking ship, and for an instant I could read the board on its stern: The Florida Sunderland, England Vanikoro THIS DREADFUL SIGHT was the first of a whole series of maritime catastrophes that the Nautilus would encounter on its run.

When it plied more heavily traveled seas, we often saw wrecked hulls rotting in midwater, and farther down, cannons, shells, anchors, chains, and a thousand other iron objects rusting away.

Meanwhile, continuously swept along by the Nautilus, where we lived in near isolation, we raised the Tuamotu Islands on December 11, that old "dangerous group"

associated with the French global navigator Commander Bougainville; it stretches from Ducie Island to Lazareff Island over an area of 500 leagues from the east-southeast to the west-northwest, between latitude 13 degrees 30' and 23 degrees 50' south, and between longitude 125 degrees 30' and 151 degrees 30' west.

This island group covers a surface area of 370 square leagues, and it's made up of some sixty subgroups, among which we noted the Gambier group, which is a French protectorate.

These islands are coral formations.

Thanks to the work of polyps, a slow but steady upheaval will someday connect these islands to each other.

Later on, this new island will be fused to its neighboring island groups, and a fifth continent will stretch from New Zealand and New Caledonia as far as the Marquesas Islands.

The day I expounded this theory to Captain Nemo, he answered me coldly: "The earth doesn't need new continents, but new men!"

Sailors' luck led the Nautilus straight to Reao Island, one of the most unusual in this group, which was discovered in 1822 by Captain Bell aboard the Minerva.

So I was able to study the madreporic process that has created the islands in this ocean.

Madrepores, which one must guard against confusing with precious coral, clothe their tissue in a limestone crust, and their variations in structure have led my famous mentor Professor Milne-Edwards to classify them into five divisions.

The tiny microscopic animals that secrete this polypary live by the billions in the depths of their cells.

Their limestone deposits build up into rocks, reefs, islets, islands.

In some places, they form atolls, a circular ring surrounding a lagoon or small inner lake that gaps place in contact with the sea.

Elsewhere, they take the shape of barrier reefs, such as those that exist along the coasts of New Caledonia and several of the Tuamotu Islands.

In still other localities, such as Runion Island and the island of Mauritius, they build fringing reefs, high, straight walls next to which the ocean's depth is considerable.

While cruising along only a few cable lengths from the underpinning of Reao Island, I marveled at the gigantic piece of work accomplished by these microscopic laborers.

These walls were the express achievements of madrepores known by the names fire coral, finger coral, star coral, and stony coral.

These polyps grow exclusively in the agitated strata at the surface of the sea, and so it's in the upper reaches that they begin these substructures, which sink little by little together with the secreted rubble binding them.

This, at least, is the theory of Mr.

Charles Darwin, who thus explains the formation of atolls--a theory superior, in my view, to the one that says these madreporic edifices sit on the summits of mountains or volcanoes submerged a few feet below sea level.

I could observe these strange walls quite closely: our sounding lines indicated that they dropped perpendicularly for more than 300 meters, and our electric beams made the bright limestone positively sparkle.

In reply to a question Conseil asked me about the growth rate of these colossal barriers, I thoroughly amazed him by saying that scientists put it at an eighth of an inch per biennium.

"Therefore,"

he said to me, "to build these walls, it took .

.

.

?"

"192,000 years, my gallant Conseil, which significantly extends the biblical Days of Creation.

What's more, the formation of coal-- in other words, the petrification of forests swallowed by floods-- and the cooling of basaltic rocks likewise call for a much longer period of time.

I might add that those 'days' in the Bible must represent whole epochs and not literally the lapse of time between two sunrises, because according to the Bible itself, the sun doesn't date from the first day of Creation."

When the Nautilus returned to the surface of the ocean, I could take in Reao Island over its whole flat, wooded expanse.

Obviously its madreporic rocks had been made fertile by tornadoes and thunderstorms.

One day, carried off by a hurricane from neighboring shores, some seed fell onto these limestone beds, mixing with decomposed particles of fish and marine plants to form vegetable humus.

Propelled by the waves, a coconut arrived on this new coast.

Its germ took root.

Its tree grew tall, catching steam off the water.

A brook was born.

Little by little, vegetation spread.

Tiny animals--worms, insects--rode ashore on tree trunks snatched from islands to windward.

Turtles came to lay their eggs.

Birds nested in the young trees.

In this way animal life developed, and drawn by the greenery and fertile soil, man appeared.

And that's how these islands were formed, the immense achievement of microscopic animals.

Near evening Reao Island melted into the distance, and the Nautilus noticeably changed course.

After touching the Tropic of Capricorn at longitude 135 degrees, it headed west-northwest, going back up the whole intertropical zone.

Although the summer sun lavished its rays on us, we never suffered from the heat, because thirty or forty meters underwater, the temperature didn't go over 10 degrees to 12 degrees centigrade.

By December 15 we had left the alluring Society Islands in the west, likewise elegant Tahiti, queen of the Pacific.

In the morning I spotted this island's lofty summits a few miles to leeward.

Its waters supplied excellent fish for the tables on board: mackerel, bonito, albacore, and a few varieties of that sea serpent named the moray eel.

The Nautilus had cleared 8,100 miles.

We logged 9,720 miles when we passed between the Tonga Islands, where crews from the Argo, Port-au-Prince, and Duke of Portland had perished, and the island group of Samoa, scene of the slaying of Captain de Langle, friend of that long-lost navigator, the Count de La Prouse.

Then we raised the Fiji Islands, where savages slaughtered sailors from the Union, as well as Captain Bureau, commander of the Darling Josephine out of Nantes, France.

Extending over an expanse of 100 leagues north to south, and over 90 leagues east to west, this island group lies between latitude 2 degrees and 6 degrees south, and between longitude 174 degrees and 179 degrees west.

It consists of a number of islands, islets, and reefs, among which we noted the islands of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Kadavu.

It was the Dutch navigator Tasman who discovered this group in 1643, the same year the Italian physicist Torricelli invented the barometer and King Louis XIV ascended the French throne.

I'll let the reader decide which of these deeds was more beneficial to humanity.

Coming later, Captain Cook in 1774, Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux in 1793, and finally Captain Dumont d'Urville in 1827, untangled the whole chaotic geography of this island group.

The Nautilus drew near Wailea Bay, an unlucky place for England's Captain Dillon, who was the first to shed light on the longstanding mystery surrounding the disappearance of ships under the Count de La Prouse.

This bay, repeatedly dredged, furnished a huge supply of excellent oysters.

As the Roman playwright Seneca recommended, we opened them right at our table, then stuffed ourselves.

These mollusks belonged to the species known by name as Ostrea lamellosa, whose members are quite common off Corsica.

This Wailea oysterbank must have been extensive, and for certain, if they hadn't been controlled by numerous natural checks, these clusters of shellfish would have ended up jam-packing the bay, since as many as 2,000,000 eggs have been counted in a single individual.

And if Mr.

Ned Land did not repent of his gluttony at our oyster fest, it's because oysters are the only dish that never causes indigestion.

In fact, it takes no less than sixteen dozen of these headless mollusks to supply the 315 grams that satisfy one man's minimum daily requirement for nitrogen.

On December 25 the Nautilus navigated amid the island group of the New Hebrides, which the Portuguese seafarer Queirs discovered in 1606, which Commander Bougainville explored in 1768, and to which Captain Cook gave its current name in 1773.

This group is chiefly made up of nine large islands and forms a 120-league strip from the north-northwest to the south-southeast, lying between latitude 2 degrees and 15 degrees south, and between longitude 164 degrees and 168 degrees.

At the moment of our noon sights, we passed fairly close to the island of Aurou, which looked to me like a mass of green woods crowned by a peak of great height.

That day it was yuletide, and it struck me that Ned Land badly missed celebrating "Christmas,"

that genuine family holiday where Protestants are such zealots.

I hadn't seen Captain Nemo for over a week, when, on the morning of the 27th, he entered the main lounge, as usual acting as if he'd been gone for just five minutes.

I was busy tracing the Nautilus's course on the world map.

The captain approached, placed a finger over a position on the chart, and pronounced just one word: "Vanikoro."

This name was magic!

It was the name of those islets where vessels under the Count de La Prouse had miscarried.

I straightened suddenly.

"The Nautilus is bringing us to Vanikoro?"

I asked.

"Yes, professor,"

the captain replied.

"And I'll be able to visit those famous islands where the Compass and the Astrolabe came to grief?"

"If you like, professor."

"When will we reach Vanikoro?"

"We already have, professor."

Followed by Captain Nemo, I climbed onto the platform, and from there my eyes eagerly scanned the horizon.

In the northeast there emerged two volcanic islands of unequal size, surrounded by a coral reef whose circuit measured forty miles.

We were facing the island of Vanikoro proper, to which Captain Dumont d'Urville had given the name "Island of the Search"; we lay right in front of the little harbor of Vana, located in latitude 16 degrees 4' south and longitude 164 degrees 32' east.

Its shores seemed covered with greenery from its beaches to its summits inland, crowned by Mt.

Kapogo, which is 476 fathoms high.

After clearing the outer belt of rocks via a narrow passageway, the Nautilus lay inside the breakers where the sea had a depth of thirty to forty fathoms.

Under the green shade of some tropical evergreens, I spotted a few savages who looked extremely startled at our approach.

In this long, blackish object advancing flush with the water, didn't they see some fearsome cetacean that they were obliged to view with distrust?

Just then Captain Nemo asked me what I knew about the shipwreck of the Count de La Prouse.

"What everybody knows, captain,"

I answered him.

"And could you kindly tell me what everybody knows?"

he asked me in a gently ironic tone.

"Very easily."

I related to him what the final deeds of Captain Dumont d'Urville had brought to light, deeds described here in this heavily condensed summary of the whole matter.

In 1785 the Count de La Prouse and his subordinate, Captain de Langle, were sent by King Louis XVI of France on a voyage to circumnavigate the globe.

They boarded two sloops of war, the Compass and the Astrolabe, which were never seen again.

In 1791, justly concerned about the fate of these two sloops of war, the French government fitted out two large cargo boats, the Search and the Hope, which left Brest on September 28 under orders from Rear Admiral Bruni d'Entrecasteaux.

Two months later, testimony from a certain Commander Bowen, aboard the Albemarle, alleged that rubble from shipwrecked vessels had been seen on the coast of New Georgia.

But d'Entrecasteaux was unaware of this news--which seemed a bit dubious anyhow--and headed toward the Admiralty Islands, which had been named in a report by one Captain Hunter as the site of the Count de La Prouse's shipwreck.

They looked in vain.

The Hope and the Search passed right by Vanikoro without stopping there; and overall, this voyage was plagued by misfortune, ultimately costing the lives of Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux, two of his subordinate officers, and several seamen from his crew.

It was an old hand at the Pacific, the English adventurer Captain Peter Dillon, who was the first to pick up the trail left by castaways from the wrecked vessels.

On May 15, 1824, his ship, the St.

Patrick, passed by Tikopia Island, one of the New Hebrides.

There a native boatman pulled alongside in a dugout canoe and sold Dillon a silver sword hilt bearing the imprint of characters engraved with a cutting tool known as a burin.

Furthermore, this native boatman claimed that during a stay in Vanikoro six years earlier, he had seen two Europeans belonging to ships that had run aground on the island's reefs many years before.

Dillon guessed that the ships at issue were those under the Count de La Prouse, ships whose disappearance had shaken the entire world.

He tried to reach Vanikoro, where, according to the native boatman, a good deal of rubble from the shipwreck could still be found, but winds and currents prevented his doing so.

Dillon returned to Calcutta.

There he was able to interest the Asiatic Society and the East India Company in his discovery.

A ship named after the Search was placed at his disposal, and he departed on January 23, 1827, accompanied by a French deputy.

This new Search, after putting in at several stops over the Pacific, dropped anchor before Vanikoro on July 7, 1827, in the same harbor of Vana where the Nautilus was currently floating.

There Dillon collected many relics of the shipwreck: iron utensils, anchors, eyelets from pulleys, swivel guns, an eighteen-pound shell, the remains of some astronomical instruments, a piece of sternrail, and a bronze bell bearing the inscription "Made by Bazin,"

the foundry mark at Brest Arsenal around 1785.

There could no longer be any doubt.

Finishing his investigations, Dillon stayed at the site of the casualty until the month of October.

Then he left Vanikoro, headed toward New Zealand, dropped anchor at Calcutta on April 7, 1828, and returned to France, where he received a very cordial welcome from King Charles X.

But just then the renowned French explorer Captain Dumont d'Urville, unaware of Dillon's activities, had already set sail to search elsewhere for the site of the shipwreck.

In essence, a whaling vessel had reported that some medals and a Cross of St.

Louis had been found in the hands of savages in the Louisiade Islands and New Caledonia.

So Captain Dumont d'Urville had put to sea in command of a vessel named after the Astrolabe, and just two months after Dillon had left Vanikoro, Dumont d'Urville dropped anchor before Hobart.

There he heard about Dillon's findings, and he further learned that a certain James Hobbs, chief officer on the Union out of Calcutta, had put to shore on an island located in latitude 8 degrees 18' south and longitude 156 degrees 30' east, and had noted the natives of those waterways making use of iron bars and red fabrics.

Pretty perplexed, Dumont d'Urville didn't know if he should give credence to these reports, which had been carried in some of the less reliable newspapers; nevertheless, he decided to start on Dillon's trail.

On February 10, 1828, the new Astrolabe hove before Tikopia Island, took on a guide and interpreter in the person of a deserter who had settled there, plied a course toward Vanikoro, raised it on February 12, sailed along its reefs until the 14th, and only on the 20th dropped anchor inside its barrier in the harbor of Vana.

On the 23rd, several officers circled the island and brought back some rubble of little importance.

The natives, adopting a system of denial and evasion, refused to guide them to the site of the casualty.

This rather shady conduct aroused the suspicion that the natives had mistreated the castaways; and in truth, the natives seemed afraid that Dumont d'Urville had come to avenge the Count de La Prouse and his unfortunate companions.

But on the 26th, appeased with gifts and seeing that they didn't need to fear any reprisals, the natives led the chief officer, Mr.

Jacquinot, to the site of the shipwreck.

At this location, in three or four fathoms of water between the Paeu and Vana reefs, there lay some anchors, cannons, and ingots of iron and lead, all caked with limestone concretions.

A launch and whaleboat from the new Astrolabe were steered to this locality, and after going to exhausting lengths, their crews managed to dredge up an anchor weighing 1,800 pounds, a cast-iron eight-pounder cannon, a lead ingot, and two copper swivel guns.

Questioning the natives, Captain Dumont d'Urville also learned that after La Prouse's two ships had miscarried on the island's reefs, the count had built a smaller craft, only to go off and miscarry a second time.

Where?

Nobody knew.

The commander of the new Astrolabe then had a monument erected under a tuft of mangrove, in memory of the famous navigator and his companions.

It was a simple quadrangular pyramid, set on a coral base, with no ironwork to tempt the natives' avarice.

Then Dumont d'Urville tried to depart; but his crews were run down from the fevers raging on these unsanitary shores, and quite ill himself, he was unable to weigh anchor until March 17.

Meanwhile, fearing that Dumont d'Urville wasn't abreast of Dillon's activities, the French government sent a sloop of war to Vanikoro, the Bayonnaise under Commander Legoarant de Tromelin, who had been stationed on the American west coast.

Dropping anchor before Vanikoro a few months after the new Astrolabe's departure, the Bayonnaise didn't find any additional evidence but verified that the savages hadn't disturbed the memorial honoring the Count de La Prouse.

This is the substance of the account I gave Captain Nemo.

"So,"

he said to me, "the castaways built a third ship on Vanikoro Island, and to this day, nobody knows where it went and perished?"

"Nobody knows."

Captain Nemo didn't reply but signaled me to follow him to the main lounge.

The Nautilus sank a few meters beneath the waves, and the panels opened.

I rushed to the window and saw crusts of coral: fungus coral, siphonula coral, alcyon coral, sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia, plus myriads of charming fish including greenfish, damselfish, sweepers, snappers, and squirrelfish; underneath this coral covering I detected some rubble the old dredges hadn't been able to tear free-- iron stirrups, anchors, cannons, shells, tackle from a capstan, a stempost, all objects hailing from the wrecked ships and now carpeted in moving flowers.

And as I stared at this desolate wreckage, Captain Nemo told me in a solemn voice: "Commander La Prouse set out on December 7, 1785, with his ships, the Compass and the Astrolabe.

He dropped anchor first at Botany Bay, visited the Tonga Islands and New Caledonia, headed toward the Santa Cruz Islands, and put in at Nomuka, one of the islands in the Ha'apai group.

Then his ships arrived at the unknown reefs of Vanikoro.

Traveling in the lead, the Compass ran afoul of breakers on the southerly coast.

The Astrolabe went to its rescue and also ran aground.

The first ship was destroyed almost immediately.

The second, stranded to leeward, held up for some days.

The natives gave the castaways a fair enough welcome.

The latter took up residence on the island and built a smaller craft with rubble from the two large ones.

A few seamen stayed voluntarily in Vanikoro.

The others, weak and ailing, set sail with the Count de La Prouse.

They headed to the Solomon Islands, and they perished with all hands on the westerly coast of the chief island in that group, between Cape Deception and Cape Satisfaction!"

"And how do you know all this?"

I exclaimed.

"Here's what I found at the very site of that final shipwreck!"

Captain Nemo showed me a tin box, stamped with the coat of arms of France and all corroded by salt water.

He opened it and I saw a bundle of papers, yellowed but still legible.

They were the actual military orders given by France's Minister of the Navy to Commander La Prouse, with notes along the margin in the handwriting of King Louis XVI!

"Ah, what a splendid death for a seaman!"

Captain Nemo then said.

"A coral grave is a tranquil grave, and may Heaven grant that my companions and I rest in no other!"

The Torres Strait DURING THE NIGHT of December 27-28, the Nautilus left the waterways of Vanikoro behind with extraordinary speed.

Its heading was southwesterly, and in three days it had cleared the 750 leagues that separated La Prouse's islands from the southeastern tip of Papua.

On January 1, 1868, bright and early, Conseil joined me on the platform.

"Will master,"

the gallant lad said to me, "allow me to wish him a happy new year?"

"Good heavens, Conseil, it's just like old times in my office at the Botanical Gardens in Paris!

I accept your kind wishes and I thank you for them.

Only, I'd like to know what you mean by a 'happy year' under the circumstances in which we're placed.

Is it a year that will bring our imprisonment to an end, or a year that will see this strange voyage continue?"

"Ye gods,"

Conseil replied, "I hardly know what to tell master.

We're certainly seeing some unusual things, and for two months we've had no time for boredom.

The latest wonder is always the most astonishing, and if this progression keeps up, I can't imagine what its climax will be.

In my opinion, we'll never again have such an opportunity."

"Never, Conseil."

"Besides, Mr.

Nemo really lives up to his Latin name, since he couldn't be less in the way if he didn't exist."

"True enough, Conseil."

"Therefore, with all due respect to master, I think a 'happy year' would be a year that lets us see everything--"

"Everything, Conseil?

No year could be that long.

But what does Ned Land think about all this?"

"Ned Land's thoughts are exactly the opposite of mine,"

Conseil replied.

"He has a practical mind and a demanding stomach.

He's tired of staring at fish and eating them day in and day out.

This shortage of wine, bread, and meat isn't suitable for an upstanding Anglo-Saxon, a man accustomed to beefsteak and unfazed by regular doses of brandy or gin!"

"For my part, Conseil, that doesn't bother me in the least, and I've adjusted very nicely to the diet on board."

"So have I,"

Conseil replied.

"Accordingly, I think as much about staying as Mr.

Land about making his escape.

Thus, if this new year isn't a happy one for me, it will be for him, and vice versa.

No matter what happens, one of us will be pleased.

So, in conclusion, I wish master to have whatever his heart desires."

"Thank you, Conseil.

Only I must ask you to postpone the question of new year's gifts, and temporarily accept a hearty handshake in their place.

That's all I have on me."

"Master has never been more generous,"

Conseil replied.

And with that, the gallant lad went away.

By January 2 we had fared 11,340 miles, hence 5,250 leagues, from our starting point in the seas of Japan.

Before the Nautilus's spur there stretched the dangerous waterways of the Coral Sea, off the northeast coast of Australia.

Our boat cruised along a few miles away from that daunting shoal where Captain Cook's ships wellnigh miscarried on June 10, 1770.

The craft that Cook was aboard charged into some coral rock, and if his vessel didn't go down, it was thanks to the circumstance that a piece of coral broke off in the collision and plugged the very hole it had made in the hull.

I would have been deeply interested in visiting this long, 360-league reef, against which the ever-surging sea broke with the fearsome intensity of thunderclaps.

But just then the Nautilus's slanting fins took us to great depths, and I could see nothing of those high coral walls.

I had to rest content with the various specimens of fish brought up by our nets.

Among others I noted some long-finned albacore, a species in the genus Scomber, as big as tuna, bluish on the flanks, and streaked with crosswise stripes that disappear when the animal dies.

These fish followed us in schools and supplied our table with very dainty flesh.

We also caught a large number of yellow-green gilthead, half a decimeter long and tasting like dorado, plus some flying gurnards, authentic underwater swallows that, on dark nights, alternately streak air and water with their phosphorescent glimmers.

Among mollusks and zoophytes, I found in our trawl's meshes various species of alcyonarian coral, sea urchins, hammer shells, spurred-star shells, wentletrap snails, horn shells, glass snails.

The local flora was represented by fine floating algae: sea tangle, and kelp from the genus Macrocystis, saturated with the mucilage their pores perspire, from which I selected a wonderful Nemastoma geliniaroidea, classifying it with the natural curiosities in the museum.

On January 4, two days after crossing the Coral Sea, we raised the coast of Papua.

On this occasion Captain Nemo told me that he intended to reach the Indian Ocean via the Torres Strait.

This was the extent of his remarks.

Ned saw with pleasure that this course would bring us, once again, closer to European seas.

The Torres Strait is regarded as no less dangerous for its bristling reefs than for the savage inhabitants of its coasts.

It separates Queensland from the huge island of Papua, also called New Guinea.

Papua is 400 leagues long by 130 leagues wide, with a surface area of 40,000 geographic leagues.

It's located between latitude 0 degrees 19' and 10 degrees 2' south, and between longitude 128 degrees 23' and 146 degrees 15'.

At noon, while the chief officer was taking the sun's altitude, I spotted the summits of the Arfak Mountains, rising in terraces and ending in sharp peaks.

Discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese Francisco Serrano, these shores were successively visited by Don Jorge de Meneses in 1526, by Juan de Grijalva in 1527, by the Spanish general Alvaro de Saavedra in 1528, by Inigo Ortiz in 1545, by the Dutchman Schouten in 1616, by Nicolas Sruick in 1753, by Tasman, Dampier, Fumel, Carteret, Edwards, Bougainville, Cook, McClure, and Thomas Forrest, by Rear Admiral d'Entrecasteaux in 1792, by Louis-Isidore Duperrey in 1823, and by Captain Dumont d'Urville in 1827.

"It's the heartland of the blacks who occupy all Malaysia,"

Mr.

de Rienzi has said; and I hadn't the foggiest inkling that sailors' luck was about to bring me face to face with these daunting Andaman aborigines.

So the Nautilus hove before the entrance to the world's most dangerous strait, a passageway that even the boldest navigators hesitated to clear: the strait that Luis Vaez de Torres faced on returning from the South Seas in Melanesia, the strait in which sloops of war under Captain Dumont d'Urville ran aground in 1840 and nearly miscarried with all hands.

And even the Nautilus, rising superior to every danger in the sea, was about to become intimate with its coral reefs.

The Torres Strait is about thirty-four leagues wide, but it's obstructed by an incalculable number of islands, islets, breakers, and rocks that make it nearly impossible to navigate.

Consequently, Captain Nemo took every desired precaution in crossing it.

Floating flush with the water, the Nautilus moved ahead at a moderate pace.

Like a cetacean's tail, its propeller churned the waves slowly.

Taking advantage of this situation, my two companions and I found seats on the ever-deserted platform.

In front of us stood the pilothouse, and unless I'm extremely mistaken, Captain Nemo must have been inside, steering his Nautilus himself.

Under my eyes I had the excellent charts of the Torres Strait that had been surveyed and drawn up by the hydrographic engineer Vincendon Dumoulin and Sublieutenant (now Admiral) Coupvent-Desbois, who were part of Dumont d'Urville's general staff during his final voyage to circumnavigate the globe.

These, along with the efforts of Captain King, are the best charts for untangling the snarl of this narrow passageway, and I consulted them with scrupulous care.

Around the Nautilus the sea was boiling furiously.

A stream of waves, bearing from southeast to northwest at a speed of two and a half miles per hour, broke over heads of coral emerging here and there.

"That's one rough sea!"

Ned Land told me.

"Abominable indeed,"

I replied, "and hardly suitable for a craft like the Nautilus."

"That damned captain,"

the Canadian went on, "must really be sure of his course, because if these clumps of coral so much as brush us, they'll rip our hull into a thousand pieces!"

The situation was indeed dangerous, but as if by magic, the Nautilus seemed to glide right down the middle of these rampaging reefs.

It didn't follow the exact course of the Zealous and the new Astrolabe, which had proved so ill-fated for Captain Dumont d'Urville.

It went more to the north, hugged the Murray Islands, and returned to the southwest near Cumberland Passage.

I thought it was about to charge wholeheartedly into this opening, but it went up to the northwest, through a large number of little-known islands and islets, and steered toward Tound Island and the Bad Channel.

I was already wondering if Captain Nemo, rash to the point of sheer insanity, wanted his ship to tackle the narrows where Dumont d'Urville's two sloops of war had gone aground, when he changed direction a second time and cut straight to the west, heading toward Gueboroa Island.

By then it was three o'clock in the afternoon.

The current was slacking off, it was almost full tide.

The Nautilus drew near this island, which I can see to this day with its remarkable fringe of screw pines.

We hugged it from less than two miles out.

A sudden jolt threw me down.

The Nautilus had just struck a reef, and it remained motionless, listing slightly to port.

When I stood up, I saw Captain Nemo and his chief officer on the platform.

They were examining the ship's circumstances, exchanging a few words in their incomprehensible dialect.

Here is what those circumstances entailed.

Two miles to starboard lay Gueboroa Island, its coastline curving north to west like an immense arm.

To the south and east, heads of coral were already on display, left uncovered by the ebbing waters.

We had run aground at full tide and in one of those seas whose tides are moderate, an inconvenient state of affairs for floating the Nautilus off.

However, the ship hadn't suffered in any way, so solidly joined was its hull.

But although it could neither sink nor split open, it was in serious danger of being permanently attached to these reefs, and that would have been the finish of Captain Nemo's submersible.

I was mulling this over when the captain approached, cool and calm, forever in control of himself, looking neither alarmed nor annoyed.

"An accident?"

I said to him.

"No, an incident,"

he answered me.

"But an incident,"

I replied, "that may oblige you to become a resident again of these shores you avoid!"

Captain Nemo gave me an odd look and gestured no.

Which told me pretty clearly that nothing would ever force him to set foot on a land mass again.

Then he said: "No, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus isn't consigned to perdition.

It will still carry you through the midst of the ocean's wonders.

Our voyage is just beginning, and I've no desire to deprive myself so soon of the pleasure of your company."

"Even so, Captain Nemo,"

I went on, ignoring his ironic turn of phrase, "the Nautilus has run aground at a moment when the sea is full.

Now then, the tides aren't strong in the Pacific, and if you can't unballast the Nautilus, which seems impossible to me, I don't see how it will float off."

"You're right, professor, the Pacific tides aren't strong,"

Captain Nemo replied.

"But in the Torres Strait, one still finds a meter-and-a-half difference in level between high and low seas.

Today is January 4, and in five days the moon will be full.

Now then, I'll be quite astonished if that good-natured satellite doesn't sufficiently raise these masses of water and do me a favor for which I'll be forever grateful."

This said, Captain Nemo went below again to the Nautilus's interior, followed by his chief officer.

As for our craft, it no longer stirred, staying as motionless as if these coral polyps had already walled it in with their indestructible cement.

"Well, sir?"

Ned Land said to me, coming up after the captain's departure.

"Well, Ned my friend, we'll serenely wait for the tide on the 9th, because it seems the moon will have the good nature to float us away!"

"As simple as that?"

"As simple as that."

"So our captain isn't going to drop his anchors, put his engines on the chains, and do anything to haul us off?"

"Since the tide will be sufficient,"

Conseil replied simply.

The Canadian stared at Conseil, then he shrugged his shoulders.

The seaman in him was talking now.

"Sir,"

he answered, "you can trust me when I say this hunk of iron will never navigate again, on the seas or under them.

It's only fit to be sold for its weight.

So I think it's time we gave Captain Nemo the slip."

"Ned my friend,"

I replied, "unlike you, I haven't given up on our valiant Nautilus, and in four days we'll know where we stand on these Pacific tides.

Besides, an escape attempt might be timely if we were in sight of the coasts of England or Provence, but in the waterways of Papua it's another story.

And we'll always have that as a last resort if the Nautilus doesn't right itself, which I'd regard as a real calamity."

"But couldn't we at least get the lay of the land?"

Ned went on.

"Here's an island.

On this island there are trees.

Under those trees land animals loaded with cutlets and roast beef, which I'd be happy to sink my teeth into."

"In this instance our friend Ned is right,"

Conseil said, "and I side with his views.

Couldn't master persuade his friend Captain Nemo to send the three of us ashore, if only so our feet don't lose the knack of treading on the solid parts of our planet?"

"I can ask him,"

I replied, "but he'll refuse."

"Let master take the risk,"

Conseil said, "and we'll know where we stand on the captain's affability."

Much to my surprise, Captain Nemo gave me the permission I asked for, and he did so with grace and alacrity, not even exacting my promise to return on board.

But fleeing across the New Guinea territories would be extremely dangerous, and I wouldn't have advised Ned Land to try it.

Better to be prisoners aboard the Nautilus than to fall into the hands of Papuan natives.

The skiff was put at our disposal for the next morning.

I hardly needed to ask whether Captain Nemo would be coming along.

I likewise assumed that no crewmen would be assigned to us, that Ned Land would be in sole charge of piloting the longboat.

Besides, the shore lay no more than two miles off, and it would be child's play for the Canadian to guide that nimble skiff through those rows of reefs so ill-fated for big ships.

The next day, January 5, after its deck paneling was opened, the skiff was wrenched from its socket and launched to sea from the top of the platform.

Two men were sufficient for this operation.

The oars were inside the longboat and we had only to take our seats.

At eight o'clock, armed with rifles and axes, we pulled clear of the Nautilus.

The sea was fairly calm.

A mild breeze blew from shore.

In place by the oars, Conseil and I rowed vigorously, and Ned steered us into the narrow lanes between the breakers.

The skiff handled easily and sped swiftly.

Ned Land couldn't conceal his glee.

He was a prisoner escaping from prison and never dreaming he would need to reenter it.

"Meat!"

he kept repeating.

"Now we'll eat red meat!

Actual game!

A real mess call, by thunder!

I'm not saying fish aren't good for you, but we mustn't overdo 'em, and a slice of fresh venison grilled over live coals will be a nice change from our standard fare."

"You glutton,"

Conseil replied, "you're making my mouth water!"

"It remains to be seen,"

I said, "whether these forests do contain game, and if the types of game aren't of such size that they can hunt the hunter."

"Fine, Professor Aronnax!"

replied the Canadian, whose teeth seemed to be as honed as the edge of an ax.

"But if there's no other quadruped on this island, I'll eat tiger--tiger sirloin."

"Our friend Ned grows disturbing,"

Conseil replied.

"Whatever it is,"

Ned Land went on, "any animal having four feet without feathers, or two feet with feathers, will be greeted by my very own one-gun salute."

"Oh good!"

I replied.

"The reckless Mr.

Land is at it again!"

"Don't worry, Professor Aronnax, just keep rowing!"

the Canadian replied.

"I only need twenty-five minutes to serve you one of my own special creations."

By 8:30 the Nautilus's skiff had just run gently aground on a sandy strand, after successfully clearing the ring of coral that surrounds Gueboroa Island.

Some Days Ashore STEPPING ASHORE had an exhilarating effect on me.

Ned Land tested the soil with his foot, as if he were laying claim to it.

Yet it had been only two months since we had become, as Captain Nemo expressed it, "passengers on the Nautilus,"

in other words, the literal prisoners of its commander.

In a few minutes we were a gunshot away from the coast.

The soil was almost entirely madreporic, but certain dry stream beds were strewn with granite rubble, proving that this island was of primordial origin.

The entire horizon was hidden behind a curtain of wonderful forests.

Enormous trees, sometimes as high as 200 feet, were linked to each other by garlands of tropical creepers, genuine natural hammocks that swayed in a mild breeze.

There were mimosas, banyan trees, beefwood, teakwood, hibiscus, screw pines, palm trees, all mingling in wild profusion; and beneath the shade of their green canopies, at the feet of their gigantic trunks, there grew orchids, leguminous plants, and ferns.

Meanwhile, ignoring all these fine specimens of Papuan flora, the Canadian passed up the decorative in favor of the functional.

He spotted a coconut palm, beat down some of its fruit, broke them open, and we drank their milk and ate their meat with a pleasure that was a protest against our standard fare on the Nautilus.

"Excellent!"

Ned Land said.

"Exquisite!"

Conseil replied.

"And I don't think,"

the Canadian said, "that your Nemo would object to us stashing a cargo of coconuts aboard his vessel?"

"I imagine not,"

I replied, "but he won't want to sample them."

"Too bad for him!"

Conseil said.

"And plenty good for us!"

Ned Land shot back.

"There'll be more left over!"

"A word of caution, Mr.

Land,"

I told the harpooner, who was about to ravage another coconut palm.

"Coconuts are admirable things, but before we stuff the skiff with them, it would be wise to find out whether this island offers other substances just as useful.

Some fresh vegetables would be well received in the Nautilus's pantry."

"Master is right,"

Conseil replied, "and I propose that we set aside three places in our longboat: one for fruit, another for vegetables, and a third for venison, of which I still haven't glimpsed the tiniest specimen."

"Don't give up so easily, Conseil,"

the Canadian replied.

"So let's continue our excursion,"

I went on, "but keep a sharp lookout.

This island seems uninhabited, but it still might harbor certain individuals who aren't so finicky about the sort of game they eat!"

"Hee hee!"

Ned put in, with a meaningful movement of his jaws.

"Ned!

Oh horrors!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"Ye gods,"

the Canadian shot back, "I'm starting to appreciate the charms of cannibalism!"

"Ned, Ned!

Don't say that!"

Conseil answered.

"You a cannibal?

Why, I'll no longer be safe next to you, I who share your cabin!

Does this mean I'll wake up half devoured one fine day?"

"I'm awfully fond of you, Conseil my friend, but not enough to eat you when there's better food around."

"Then I daren't delay,"

Conseil replied.

"The hunt is on!

We absolutely must bag some game to placate this man-eater, or one of these mornings master won't find enough pieces of his manservant to serve him."

While exchanging this chitchat, we entered beneath the dark canopies of the forest, and for two hours we explored it in every direction.

We couldn't have been luckier in our search for edible vegetation, and some of the most useful produce in the tropical zones supplied us with a valuable foodstuff missing on board.

I mean the breadfruit tree, which is quite abundant on Gueboroa Island, and there I chiefly noted the seedless variety that in Malaysia is called "rima."

This tree is distinguished from other trees by a straight trunk forty feet high.

To the naturalist's eye, its gracefully rounded crown, formed of big multilobed leaves, was enough to denote the artocarpus that has been so successfully transplanted to the Mascarene Islands east of Madagascar.

From its mass of greenery, huge globular fruit stood out, a decimeter wide and furnished on the outside with creases that assumed a hexangular pattern.

It's a handy plant that nature gives to regions lacking in wheat; without needing to be cultivated, it bears fruit eight months out of the year.

Ned Land was on familiar terms with this fruit.

He had already eaten it on his many voyages and knew how to cook its edible substance.

So the very sight of it aroused his appetite, and he couldn't control himself.

"Sir,"

he told me, "I'll die if I don't sample a little breadfruit pasta!"

"Sample some, Ned my friend, sample all you like.

We're here to conduct experiments, let's conduct them."

"It won't take a minute,"

the Canadian replied.

Equipped with a magnifying glass, he lit a fire of deadwood that was soon crackling merrily.

Meanwhile Conseil and I selected the finest artocarpus fruit.

Some still weren't ripe enough, and their thick skins covered white, slightly fibrous pulps.

But a great many others were yellowish and gelatinous, just begging to be picked.

This fruit contained no pits.

Conseil brought a dozen of them to Ned Land, who cut them into thick slices and placed them over a fire of live coals, all the while repeating: "You'll see, sir, how tasty this bread is!"

"Especially since we've gone without baked goods for so long,"

Conseil said.

"It's more than just bread,"

the Canadian added.

"It's a dainty pastry.

You've never eaten any, sir?"

"No, Ned."

"All right, get ready for something downright delectable!

If you don't come back for seconds, I'm no longer the King of Harpooners!"

After a few minutes, the parts of the fruit exposed to the fire were completely toasted.

On the inside there appeared some white pasta, a sort of soft bread center whose flavor reminded me of artichoke.

This bread was excellent, I must admit, and I ate it with great pleasure.

"Unfortunately,"

I said, "this pasta won't stay fresh, so it seems pointless to make a supply for on board."

"By thunder, sir!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

"There you go, talking like a naturalist, but meantime I'll be acting like a baker!

Conseil, harvest some of this fruit to take with us when we go back."

"And how will you prepare it?"

I asked the Canadian.

"I'll make a fermented batter from its pulp that'll keep indefinitely without spoiling.

When I want some, I'll just cook it in the galley on board--it'll have a slightly tart flavor, but you'll find it excellent."

"So, Mr.

Ned, I see that this bread is all we need--"

"Not quite, professor,"

the Canadian replied.

"We need some fruit to go with it, or at least some vegetables."

"Then let's look for fruit and vegetables."

When our breadfruit harvesting was done, we took to the trail to complete this "dry-land dinner."

We didn't search in vain, and near noontime we had an ample supply of bananas.

This delicious produce from the Torrid Zones ripens all year round, and Malaysians, who give them the name "pisang,"

eat them without bothering to cook them.

In addition to bananas, we gathered some enormous jackfruit with a very tangy flavor, some tasty mangoes, and some pineapples of unbelievable size.

But this foraging took up a good deal of our time, which, even so, we had no cause to regret.

Conseil kept Ned under observation.

The harpooner walked in the lead, and during his stroll through this forest, he gathered with sure hands some excellent fruit that should have completed his provisions.

"So,"

Conseil asked, "you have everything you need, Ned my friend?"

"Humph!"

the Canadian put in.

"What!

You're complaining?"

"All this vegetation doesn't make a meal,"

Ned replied.

"Just side dishes, dessert.

But where's the soup course?

Where's the roast?"

"Right,"

I said.

"Ned promised us cutlets, which seems highly questionable to me."

"Sir,"

the Canadian replied, "our hunting not only isn't over, it hasn't even started.

Patience!

We're sure to end up bumping into some animal with either feathers or fur, if not in this locality, then in another."

"And if not today, then tomorrow, because we mustn't wander too far off,"

Conseil added.

"That's why I propose that we return to the skiff."

"What!

Already!"

Ned exclaimed.

"We ought to be back before nightfall,"

I said.

"But what hour is it, then?"

the Canadian asked.

"Two o'clock at least,"

Conseil replied.

"How time flies on solid ground!"

exclaimed Mr.

Ned Land with a sigh of regret.

"Off we go!"

Conseil replied.

So we returned through the forest, and we completed our harvest by making a clean sweep of some palm cabbages that had to be picked from the crowns of their trees, some small beans that I recognized as the "abrou"

of the Malaysians, and some high-quality yams.

We were overloaded when we arrived at the skiff.

However, Ned Land still found these provisions inadequate.

But fortune smiled on him.

Just as we were boarding, he spotted several trees twenty-five to thirty feet high, belonging to the palm species.

As valuable as the artocarpus, these trees are justly ranked among the most useful produce in Malaysia.

They were sago palms, vegetation that grows without being cultivated; like mulberry trees, they reproduce by means of shoots and seeds.

Ned Land knew how to handle these trees.

Taking his ax and wielding it with great vigor, he soon stretched out on the ground two or three sago palms, whose maturity was revealed by the white dust sprinkled over their palm fronds.

I watched him more as a naturalist than as a man in hunger.

He began by removing from each trunk an inch-thick strip of bark that covered a network of long, hopelessly tangled fibers that were puttied with a sort of gummy flour.

This flour was the starch-like sago, an edible substance chiefly consumed by the Melanesian peoples.

For the time being, Ned Land was content to chop these trunks into pieces, as if he were making firewood; later he would extract the flour by sifting it through cloth to separate it from its fibrous ligaments, let it dry out in the sun, and leave it to harden inside molds.

Finally, at five o'clock in the afternoon, laden with all our treasures, we left the island beach and half an hour later pulled alongside the Nautilus.

Nobody appeared on our arrival.

The enormous sheet-iron cylinder seemed deserted.

Our provisions loaded on board, I went below to my stateroom.

There I found my supper ready.

I ate and then fell asleep.

The next day, January 6: nothing new on board.

Not a sound inside, not a sign of life.

The skiff stayed alongside in the same place we had left it.

We decided to return to Gueboroa Island.

Ned Land hoped for better luck in his hunting than on the day before, and he wanted to visit a different part of the forest.

By sunrise we were off.

Carried by an inbound current, the longboat reached the island in a matter of moments.

We disembarked, and thinking it best to abide by the Canadian's instincts, we followed Ned Land, whose long legs threatened to outpace us.

Ned Land went westward up the coast; then, fording some stream beds, he reached open plains that were bordered by wonderful forests.

Some kingfishers lurked along the watercourses, but they didn't let us approach.

Their cautious behavior proved to me that these winged creatures knew where they stood on bipeds of our species, and I concluded that if this island wasn't inhabited, at least human beings paid it frequent visits.

After crossing a pretty lush prairie, we arrived on the outskirts of a small wood, enlivened by the singing and soaring of a large number of birds.

"Still, they're merely birds,"

Conseil said.

"But some are edible,"

the harpooner replied.

"Wrong, Ned my friend,"

Conseil answered, "because I see only ordinary parrots here."

"Conseil my friend,"

Ned replied in all seriousness, "parrots are like pheasant to people with nothing else on their plates."

"And I might add,"

I said, "that when these birds are properly cooked, they're at least worth a stab of the fork."

Indeed, under the dense foliage of this wood, a whole host of parrots fluttered from branch to branch, needing only the proper upbringing to speak human dialects.

At present they were cackling in chorus with parakeets of every color, with solemn cockatoos that seemed to be pondering some philosophical problem, while bright red lories passed by like pieces of bunting borne on the breeze, in the midst of kalao parrots raucously on the wing, Papuan lories painted the subtlest shades of azure, and a whole variety of delightful winged creatures, none terribly edible.

However, one bird unique to these shores, which never passes beyond the boundaries of the Aru and Papuan Islands, was missing from this collection.

But I was given a chance to marvel at it soon enough.

After crossing through a moderately dense thicket, we again found some plains obstructed by bushes.

There I saw some magnificent birds soaring aloft, the arrangement of their long feathers causing them to head into the wind.

Their undulating flight, the grace of their aerial curves, and the play of their colors allured and delighted the eye.

I had no trouble identifying them.

"Birds of paradise!"

I exclaimed.

"Order Passeriforma, division Clystomora,"

Conseil replied.

"Partridge family?"

Ned Land asked.

"I doubt it, Mr.

Land.

Nevertheless, I'm counting on your dexterity to catch me one of these delightful representatives of tropical nature!"

"I'll give it a try, professor, though I'm handier with a harpoon than a rifle."

Malaysians, who do a booming business in these birds with the Chinese, have various methods for catching them that we couldn't use.

Sometimes they set snares on the tops of the tall trees that the bird of paradise prefers to inhabit.

At other times they capture it with a tenacious glue that paralyzes its movements.

They will even go so far as to poison the springs where these fowl habitually drink.

But in our case, all we could do was fire at them on the wing, which left us little chance of getting one.

And in truth, we used up a good part of our ammunition in vain.

Near eleven o'clock in the morning, we cleared the lower slopes of the mountains that form the island's center, and we still hadn't bagged a thing.

Hunger spurred us on.

The hunters had counted on consuming the proceeds of their hunting, and they had miscalculated.

Luckily, and much to his surprise, Conseil pulled off a right-and-left shot and insured our breakfast.

He brought down a white pigeon and a ringdove, which were briskly plucked, hung from a spit, and roasted over a blazing fire of deadwood.

While these fascinating animals were cooking, Ned prepared some bread from the artocarpus.

Then the pigeon and ringdove were devoured to the bones and declared excellent.

Nutmeg, on which these birds habitually gorge themselves, sweetens their flesh and makes it delicious eating.

"They taste like chicken stuffed with truffles,"

Conseil said.

"All right, Ned,"

I asked the Canadian, "now what do you need?"

"Game with four paws, Professor Aronnax,"

Ned Land replied.

"All these pigeons are only appetizers, snacks.

So till I've bagged an animal with cutlets, I won't be happy!"

"Nor I, Ned, until I've caught a bird of paradise."

"Then let's keep hunting,"

Conseil replied, "but while heading back to the sea.

We've arrived at the foothills of these mountains, and I think we'll do better if we return to the forest regions."

It was good advice and we took it.

After an hour's walk we reached a genuine sago palm forest.

A few harmless snakes fled underfoot.

Birds of paradise stole off at our approach, and I was in real despair of catching one when Conseil, walking in the lead, stooped suddenly, gave a triumphant shout, and came back to me, carrying a magnificent bird of paradise.

"Oh bravo, Conseil!"

I exclaimed.

"Master is too kind,"

Conseil replied.

"Not at all, my boy.

That was a stroke of genius, catching one of these live birds with your bare hands!"

"If master will examine it closely, he'll see that I deserve no great praise."

"And why not, Conseil?"

"Because this bird is as drunk as a lord."

"Drunk?"

"Yes, master, drunk from the nutmegs it was devouring under that nutmeg tree where I caught it.

See, Ned my friend, see the monstrous results of intemperance!"

"Damnation!"

the Canadian shot back.

"Considering the amount of gin I've had these past two months, you've got nothing to complain about!"

Meanwhile I was examining this unusual bird.

Conseil was not mistaken.

Tipsy from that potent juice, our bird of paradise had been reduced to helplessness.

It was unable to fly.

It was barely able to walk.

But this didn't alarm me, and I just let it sleep off its nutmeg.

This bird belonged to the finest of the eight species credited to Papua and its neighboring islands.

It was a "great emerald,"

one of the rarest birds of paradise.

It measured three decimeters long.

Its head was comparatively small, and its eyes, placed near the opening of its beak, were also small.

But it offered a wonderful mixture of hues: a yellow beak, brown feet and claws, hazel wings with purple tips, pale yellow head and scruff of the neck, emerald throat, the belly and chest maroon to brown.

Two strands, made of a horn substance covered with down, rose over its tail, which was lengthened by long, very light feathers of wonderful fineness, and they completed the costume of this marvelous bird that the islanders have poetically named "the sun bird."

How I wished I could take this superb bird of paradise back to Paris, to make a gift of it to the zoo at the Botanical Gardens, which doesn't own a single live specimen.

"So it must be a rarity or something?"

the Canadian asked, in the tone of a hunter who, from the viewpoint of his art, gives the game a pretty low rating.

"A great rarity, my gallant comrade, and above all very hard to capture alive.

And even after they're dead, there's still a major market for these birds.

So the natives have figured out how to create fake ones, like people create fake pearls or diamonds."

"What!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"They make counterfeit birds of paradise?"

"Yes, Conseil."

"And is master familiar with how the islanders go about it?"

"Perfectly familiar.

During the easterly monsoon season, birds of paradise lose the magnificent feathers around their tails that naturalists call 'below-the-wing' feathers.

These feathers are gathered by the fowl forgers and skillfully fitted onto some poor previously mutilated parakeet.

Then they paint over the suture, varnish the bird, and ship the fruits of their unique labors to museums and collectors in Europe."

"Good enough!"

Ned Land put in.

"If it isn't the right bird, it's still the right feathers, and so long as the merchandise isn't meant to be eaten, I see no great harm!"

But if my desires were fulfilled by the capture of this bird of paradise, those of our Canadian huntsman remained unsatisfied.

Luckily, near two o'clock Ned Land brought down a magnificent wild pig of the type the natives call "bari-outang."

This animal came in the nick of time for us to bag some real quadruped meat, and it was warmly welcomed.

Ned Land proved himself quite gloriously with his gunshot.

Hit by an electric bullet, the pig dropped dead on the spot.

The Canadian properly skinned and cleaned it, after removing half a dozen cutlets destined to serve as the grilled meat course of our evening meal.

Then the hunt was on again, and once more would be marked by the exploits of Ned and Conseil.

In essence, beating the bushes, the two friends flushed a herd of kangaroos that fled by bounding away on their elastic paws.

But these animals didn't flee so swiftly that our electric capsules couldn't catch up with them.

"Oh, professor!"

shouted Ned Land, whose hunting fever had gone to his brain.

"What excellent game, especially in a stew!

What a supply for the Nautilus!

Two, three, five down!

And just think how we'll devour all this meat ourselves, while those numbskulls on board won't get a shred!"

In his uncontrollable glee, I think the Canadian might have slaughtered the whole horde, if he hadn't been so busy talking!

But he was content with a dozen of these fascinating marsupials, which make up the first order of aplacental mammals, as Conseil just had to tell us.

These animals were small in stature.

They were a species of those "rabbit kangaroos"

that usually dwell in the hollows of trees and are tremendously fast; but although of moderate dimensions, they at least furnish a meat that's highly prized.

We were thoroughly satisfied with the results of our hunting.

A gleeful Ned proposed that we return the next day to this magic island, which he planned to depopulate of its every edible quadruped.

But he was reckoning without events.

By six o'clock in the evening, we were back on the beach.

The skiff was aground in its usual place.

The Nautilus, looking like a long reef, emerged from the waves two miles offshore.

Without further ado, Ned Land got down to the important business of dinner.

He came wonderfully to terms with its entire cooking.

Grilling over the coals, those cutlets from the "bari-outang"

soon gave off a succulent aroma that perfumed the air.

But I catch myself following in the Canadian's footsteps.

Look at me--in ecstasy over freshly grilled pork!

Please grant me a pardon as I've already granted one to Mr.

Land, and on the same grounds!

In short, dinner was excellent.

Two ringdoves rounded out this extraordinary menu.

Sago pasta, bread from the artocarpus, mangoes, half a dozen pineapples, and the fermented liquor from certain coconuts heightened our glee.

I suspect that my two fine companions weren't quite as clearheaded as one could wish.

"What if we don't return to the Nautilus this evening?"

Conseil said.

"What if we never return to it?"

Ned Land added.

Just then a stone whizzed toward us, landed at our feet, and cut short the harpooner's proposition.

The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo WITHOUT STANDING UP, we stared in the direction of the forest, my hand stopping halfway to my mouth, Ned Land's completing its assignment.

"Stones don't fall from the sky,"

Conseil said, "or else they deserve to be called meteorites."

A second well-polished stone removed a tasty ringdove leg from Conseil's hand, giving still greater relevance to his observation.

We all three stood up, rifles to our shoulders, ready to answer any attack.

"Apes maybe?"

Ned Land exclaimed.

"Nearly,"

Conseil replied.

"Savages."

"Head for the skiff!"

I said, moving toward the sea.

Indeed, it was essential to beat a retreat because some twenty natives, armed with bows and slings, appeared barely a hundred paces off, on the outskirts of a thicket that masked the horizon to our right.

The skiff was aground ten fathoms away from us.

The savages approached without running, but they favored us with a show of the greatest hostility.

It was raining stones and arrows.

Ned Land was unwilling to leave his provisions behind, and despite the impending danger, he clutched his pig on one side, his kangaroos on the other, and scampered off with respectable speed.

In two minutes we were on the strand.

Loading provisions and weapons into the skiff, pushing it to sea, and positioning its two oars were the work of an instant.

We hadn't gone two cable lengths when a hundred savages, howling and gesticulating, entered the water up to their waists.

I looked to see if their appearance might draw some of the Nautilus's men onto the platform.

But no.

Lying well out, that enormous machine still seemed completely deserted.

Twenty minutes later we boarded ship.

The hatches were open.

After mooring the skiff, we reentered the Nautilus's interior.

I went below to the lounge, from which some chords were wafting.

Captain Nemo was there, leaning over the organ, deep in a musical trance.

"Captain!"

I said to him.

He didn't hear me.

"Captain!"

I went on, touching him with my hand.

He trembled, and turning around: "Ah, it's you, professor!"

he said to me.

"Well, did you have a happy hunt?

Was your herb gathering a success?"

"Yes, captain,"

I replied, "but unfortunately we've brought back a horde of bipeds whose proximity worries me."

"What sort of bipeds?"

"Savages."

"Savages!"

Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone.

"You set foot on one of the shores of this globe, professor, and you're surprised to find savages there?

Where aren't there savages?

And besides, are they any worse than men elsewhere, these people you call savages?"

"But captain--"

"Speaking for myself, sir, I've encountered them everywhere."

"Well then,"

I replied, "if you don't want to welcome them aboard the Nautilus, you'd better take some precautions!"

"Easy, professor, no cause for alarm."

"But there are a large number of these natives."

"What's your count?"

"At least a hundred."

"Professor Aronnax,"

replied Captain Nemo, whose fingers took their places again on the organ keys, "if every islander in Papua were to gather on that beach, the Nautilus would still have nothing to fear from their attacks!"

The captain's fingers then ran over the instrument's keyboard, and I noticed that he touched only its black keys, which gave his melodies a basically Scottish color.

Soon he had forgotten my presence and was lost in a reverie that I no longer tried to dispel.

I climbed onto the platform.

Night had already fallen, because in this low latitude the sun sets quickly, without any twilight.

I could see Gueboroa Island only dimly.

But numerous fires had been kindled on the beach, attesting that the natives had no thoughts of leaving it.

For several hours I was left to myself, sometimes musing on the islanders-- but no longer fearing them because the captain's unflappable confidence had won me over--and sometimes forgetting them to marvel at the splendors of this tropical night.

My memories took wing toward France, in the wake of those zodiacal stars due to twinkle over it in a few hours.

The moon shone in the midst of the constellations at their zenith.

I then remembered that this loyal, good-natured satellite would return to this same place the day after tomorrow, to raise the tide and tear the Nautilus from its coral bed.

Near midnight, seeing that all was quiet over the darkened waves as well as under the waterside trees, I repaired to my cabin and fell into a peaceful sleep.

The night passed without mishap.

No doubt the Papuans had been frightened off by the mere sight of this monster aground in the bay, because our hatches stayed open, offering easy access to the Nautilus's interior.

At six o'clock in the morning, January 8, I climbed onto the platform.

The morning shadows were lifting.

The island was soon on view through the dissolving mists, first its beaches, then its summits.

The islanders were still there, in greater numbers than on the day before, perhaps 500 or 600 of them.

Taking advantage of the low tide, some of them had moved forward over the heads of coral to within two cable lengths of the Nautilus.

I could easily distinguish them.

They obviously were true Papuans, men of fine stock, athletic in build, forehead high and broad, nose large but not flat, teeth white.

Their woolly, red-tinted hair was in sharp contrast to their bodies, which were black and glistening like those of Nubians.

Beneath their pierced, distended earlobes there dangled strings of beads made from bone.

Generally these savages were naked.

I noted some women among them, dressed from hip to knee in grass skirts held up by belts made of vegetation.

Some of the chieftains adorned their necks with crescents and with necklaces made from beads of red and white glass.

Armed with bows, arrows, and shields, nearly all of them carried from their shoulders a sort of net, which held those polished stones their slings hurl with such dexterity.

One of these chieftains came fairly close to the Nautilus, examining it with care.

He must have been a "mado"

of high rank, because he paraded in a mat of banana leaves that had ragged edges and was accented with bright colors.

I could easily have picked off this islander, he stood at such close range; but I thought it best to wait for an actual show of hostility.

Between Europeans and savages, it's acceptable for Europeans to shoot back but not to attack first.

During this whole time of low tide, the islanders lurked near the Nautilus, but they weren't boisterous.

I often heard them repeat the word "assai,"

and from their gestures I understood they were inviting me to go ashore, an invitation I felt obliged to decline.

So the skiff didn't leave shipside that day, much to the displeasure of Mr.

Land who couldn't complete his provisions.

The adroit Canadian spent his time preparing the meat and flour products he had brought from Gueboroa Island.

As for the savages, they went back to shore near eleven o'clock in the morning, when the heads of coral began to disappear under the waves of the rising tide.

But I saw their numbers swell considerably on the beach.

It was likely that they had come from neighboring islands or from the mainland of Papua proper.

However, I didn't see one local dugout canoe.

Having nothing better to do, I decided to dredge these beautiful, clear waters, which exhibited a profusion of shells, zoophytes, and open-sea plants.

Besides, it was the last day the Nautilus would spend in these waterways, if, tomorrow, it still floated off to the open sea as Captain Nemo had promised.

So I summoned Conseil, who brought me a small, light dragnet similar to those used in oyster fishing.

"What about these savages?"

Conseil asked me.

"With all due respect to master, they don't strike me as very wicked!"

"They're cannibals even so, my boy."

"A person can be both a cannibal and a decent man,"

Conseil replied, "just as a person can be both gluttonous and honorable.

The one doesn't exclude the other."

"Fine, Conseil!

And I agree that there are honorable cannibals who decently devour their prisoners.

However, I'm opposed to being devoured, even in all decency, so I'll keep on my guard, especially since the Nautilus's commander seems to be taking no precautions.

And now let's get to work!"

For two hours our fishing proceeded energetically but without bringing up any rarities.

Our dragnet was filled with Midas abalone, harp shells, obelisk snails, and especially the finest hammer shells I had seen to that day.

We also gathered in a few sea cucumbers, some pearl oysters, and a dozen small turtles that we saved for the ship's pantry.

But just when I least expected it, I laid my hands on a wonder, a natural deformity I'd have to call it, something very seldom encountered.

Conseil had just made a cast of the dragnet, and his gear had come back up loaded with a variety of fairly ordinary seashells, when suddenly he saw me plunge my arms swiftly into the net, pull out a shelled animal, and give a conchological yell, in other words, the most piercing yell a human throat can produce.

"Eh?

What happened to master?"

Conseil asked, very startled.

"Did master get bitten?"

"No, my boy, but I'd gladly have sacrificed a finger for such a find!"

"What find?"

"This shell,"

I said, displaying the subject of my triumph.

"But that's simply an olive shell of the 'tent olive' species, genus Oliva, order Pectinibranchia, class Gastropoda, branch Mollusca--"

"Yes, yes, Conseil!

But instead of coiling from right to left, this olive shell rolls from left to right!"

"It can't be!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"Yes, my boy, it's a left-handed shell!"

"A left-handed shell!"

Conseil repeated, his heart pounding.

"Look at its spiral!"

"Oh, master can trust me on this,"

Conseil said, taking the valuable shell in trembling hands, "but never have I felt such excitement!"

And there was good reason to be excited!

In fact, as naturalists have ventured to observe, "dextrality"

is a well-known law of nature.

In their rotational and orbital movements, stars and their satellites go from right to left.

Man uses his right hand more often than his left, and consequently his various instruments and equipment (staircases, locks, watch springs, etc.) are designed to be used in a right-to-left manner.

Now then, nature has generally obeyed this law in coiling her shells.

They're right-handed with only rare exceptions, and when by chance a shell's spiral is left-handed, collectors will pay its weight in gold for it.

So Conseil and I were deep in the contemplation of our treasure, and I was solemnly promising myself to enrich the Paris Museum with it, when an ill-timed stone, hurled by one of the islanders, whizzed over and shattered the valuable object in Conseil's hands.

I gave a yell of despair!

Conseil pounced on his rifle and aimed at a savage swinging a sling just ten meters away from him.

I tried to stop him, but his shot went off and shattered a bracelet of amulets dangling from the islander's arm.

"Conseil!"

I shouted.

"Conseil!"

"Eh?

What?

Didn't master see that this man-eater initiated the attack?"

"A shell isn't worth a human life!"

I told him.

"Oh, the rascal!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"I'd rather he cracked my shoulder!"

Conseil was in dead earnest, but I didn't subscribe to his views.

However, the situation had changed in only a short time and we hadn't noticed.

Now some twenty dugout canoes were surrounding the Nautilus.

Hollowed from tree trunks, these dugouts were long, narrow, and well designed for speed, keeping their balance by means of two bamboo poles that floated on the surface of the water.

They were maneuvered by skillful, half-naked paddlers, and I viewed their advance with definite alarm.

It was obvious these Papuans had already entered into relations with Europeans and knew their ships.

But this long, iron cylinder lying in the bay, with no masts or funnels--what were they to make of it?

Nothing good, because at first they kept it at a respectful distance.

However, seeing that it stayed motionless, they regained confidence little by little and tried to become more familiar with it.

Now then, it was precisely this familiarity that we needed to prevent.

Since our weapons made no sound when they went off, they would have only a moderate effect on these islanders, who reputedly respect nothing but noisy mechanisms.

Without thunderclaps, lightning bolts would be much less frightening, although the danger lies in the flash, not the noise.

Just then the dugout canoes drew nearer to the Nautilus, and a cloud of arrows burst over us.

"Fire and brimstone, it's hailing!"

Conseil said.

"And poisoned hail perhaps!"

"We've got to alert Captain Nemo,"

I said, reentering the hatch.

I went below to the lounge.

I found no one there.

I ventured a knock at the door opening into the captain's stateroom.

The word "Enter!"

answered me.

I did so and found Captain Nemo busy with calculations in which there was no shortage of X and other algebraic signs.

"Am I disturbing you?"

I said out of politeness.

"Correct, Professor Aronnax,"

the captain answered me.

"But I imagine you have pressing reasons for looking me up?"

"Very pressing.

Native dugout canoes are surrounding us, and in a few minutes we're sure to be assaulted by several hundred savages."

"Ah!"

Captain Nemo put in serenely.

"They've come in their dugouts?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, sir, closing the hatches should do the trick."

"Precisely, and that's what I came to tell you--"

"Nothing easier,"

Captain Nemo said.

And he pressed an electric button, transmitting an order to the crew's quarters.

"There, sir, all under control!"

he told me after a few moments.

"The skiff is in place and the hatches are closed.

I don't imagine you're worried that these gentlemen will stave in walls that shells from your frigate couldn't breach?"

"No, captain, but one danger still remains."

"What's that, sir?"

"Tomorrow at about this time, we'll need to reopen the hatches to renew the Nautilus's air."

"No argument, sir, since our craft breathes in the manner favored by cetaceans."

"But if these Papuans are occupying the platform at that moment, I don't see how you can prevent them from entering."

"Then, sir, you assume they'll board the ship?"

"I'm certain of it."

"Well, sir, let them come aboard.

I see no reason to prevent them.

Deep down they're just poor devils, these Papuans, and I don't want my visit to Gueboroa Island to cost the life of a single one of these unfortunate people!"

On this note I was about to withdraw; but Captain Nemo detained me and invited me to take a seat next to him.

He questioned me with interest on our excursions ashore and on our hunting, but seemed not to understand the Canadian's passionate craving for red meat.

Then our conversation skimmed various subjects, and without being more forthcoming, Captain Nemo proved more affable.

Among other things, we came to talk of the Nautilus's circumstances, aground in the same strait where Captain Dumont d'Urville had nearly miscarried.

Then, pertinent to this: "He was one of your great seamen,"

the captain told me, "one of your shrewdest navigators, that d'Urville!

He was the Frenchman's Captain Cook.

A man wise but unlucky!

Braving the ice banks of the South Pole, the coral of Oceania, the cannibals of the Pacific, only to perish wretchedly in a train wreck!

If that energetic man was able to think about his life in its last seconds, imagine what his final thoughts must have been!"

As he spoke, Captain Nemo seemed deeply moved, an emotion I felt was to his credit.

Then, chart in hand, we returned to the deeds of the French navigator: his voyages to circumnavigate the globe, his double attempt at the South Pole, which led to his discovery of the Adlie Coast and the Louis-Philippe Peninsula, finally his hydrographic surveys of the chief islands in Oceania.

"What your d'Urville did on the surface of the sea,"

Captain Nemo told me, "I've done in the ocean's interior, but more easily, more completely than he.

Constantly tossed about by hurricanes, the Zealous and the new Astrolabe couldn't compare with the Nautilus, a quiet work room truly at rest in the midst of the waters!"

"Even so, captain,"

I said, "there is one major similarity between Dumont d'Urville's sloops of war and the Nautilus."

"What's that, sir?"

"Like them, the Nautilus has run aground!"

"The Nautilus is not aground, sir,"

Captain Nemo replied icily.

"The Nautilus was built to rest on the ocean floor, and I don't need to undertake the arduous labors, the maneuvers d'Urville had to attempt in order to float off his sloops of war.

The Zealous and the new Astrolabe wellnigh perished, but my Nautilus is in no danger.

Tomorrow, on the day stated and at the hour stated, the tide will peacefully lift it off, and it will resume its navigating through the seas."

"Captain,"

I said, "I don't doubt--"

"Tomorrow,"

Captain Nemo added, standing up, "tomorrow at 2:40 in the afternoon, the Nautilus will float off and exit the Torres Strait undamaged."

Pronouncing these words in an extremely sharp tone, Captain Nemo gave me a curt bow.

This was my dismissal, and I reentered my stateroom.

There I found Conseil, who wanted to know the upshot of my interview with the captain.

"My boy,"

I replied, "when I expressed the belief that these Papuan natives were a threat to his Nautilus, the captain answered me with great irony.

So I've just one thing to say to you: have faith in him and sleep in peace."

"Master has no need for my services?"

"No, my friend.

What's Ned Land up to?"

"Begging master's indulgence,"

Conseil replied, "but our friend Ned is concocting a kangaroo pie that will be the eighth wonder!"

I was left to myself; I went to bed but slept pretty poorly.

I kept hearing noises from the savages, who were stamping on the platform and letting out deafening yells.

The night passed in this way, without the crew ever emerging from their usual inertia.

They were no more disturbed by the presence of these man-eaters than soldiers in an armored fortress are troubled by ants running over the armor plate.

I got up at six o'clock in the morning.

The hatches weren't open.

So the air inside hadn't been renewed; but the air tanks were kept full for any eventuality and would function appropriately to shoot a few cubic meters of oxygen into the Nautilus's thin atmosphere.

I worked in my stateroom until noon without seeing Captain Nemo even for an instant.

Nobody on board seemed to be making any preparations for departure.

I still waited for a while, then I made my way to the main lounge.

Its timepiece marked 2:30.

In ten minutes the tide would reach its maximum elevation, and if Captain Nemo hadn't made a rash promise, the Nautilus would immediately break free.

If not, many months might pass before it could leave its coral bed.

But some preliminary vibrations could soon be felt over the boat's hull.

I heard its plating grind against the limestone roughness of that coral base.

At 2:35 Captain Nemo appeared in the lounge.

"We're about to depart,"

he said.

"Ah!"

I put in.

"I've given orders to open the hatches."

"What about the Papuans?"

"What about them?"

Captain Nemo replied, with a light shrug of his shoulders.

"Won't they come inside the Nautilus?"

"How will they manage that?"

"By jumping down the hatches you're about to open."

"Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo replied serenely, "the Nautilus's hatches aren't to be entered in that fashion even when they're open."

I gaped at the captain.

"You don't understand?"

he said to me.

"Not in the least."

"Well, come along and you'll see!"

I headed to the central companionway.

There, very puzzled, Ned Land and Conseil watched the crewmen opening the hatches, while a frightful clamor and furious shouts resounded outside.

The hatch lids fell back onto the outer plating.

Twenty horrible faces appeared.

But when the first islander laid hands on the companionway railing, he was flung backward by some invisible power, lord knows what!

He ran off, howling in terror and wildly prancing around.

Ten of his companions followed him.

All ten met the same fate.

Conseil was in ecstasy.

Carried away by his violent instincts, Ned Land leaped up the companionway.

But as soon as his hands seized the railing, he was thrown backward in his turn.

"Damnation!"

he exclaimed.

"I've been struck by a lightning bolt!"

These words explained everything to me.

It wasn't just a railing that led to the platform, it was a metal cable fully charged with the ship's electricity.

Anyone who touched it got a fearsome shock-- and such a shock would have been fatal if Captain Nemo had thrown the full current from his equipment into this conducting cable!

It could honestly be said that he had stretched between himself and his assailants a network of electricity no one could clear with impunity.

Meanwhile, crazed with terror, the unhinged Papuans beat a retreat.

As for us, half laughing, we massaged and comforted poor Ned Land, who was swearing like one possessed.

But just then, lifted off by the tide's final undulations, the Nautilus left its coral bed at exactly that fortieth minute pinpointed by the captain.

Its propeller churned the waves with lazy majesty.

Gathering speed little by little, the ship navigated on the surface of the ocean, and safe and sound, it left behind the dangerous narrows of the Torres Strait.

"Aegri Somnia"* *Latin: "troubled dreams."

Ed.

THE FOLLOWING DAY, January 10, the Nautilus resumed its travels in midwater but at a remarkable speed that I estimated to be at least thirty-five miles per hour.

The propeller was going so fast I could neither follow nor count its revolutions.

I thought about how this marvelous electric force not only gave motion, heat, and light to the Nautilus but even protected it against outside attack, transforming it into a sacred ark no profane hand could touch without being blasted; my wonderment was boundless, and it went from the submersible itself to the engineer who had created it.

We were traveling due west and on January 11 we doubled Cape Wessel, located in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 10 degrees north, the western tip of the Gulf of Carpentaria.

Reefs were still numerous but more widely scattered and were fixed on the chart with the greatest accuracy.

The Nautilus easily avoided the Money breakers to port and the Victoria reefs to starboard, positioned at longitude 130 degrees on the tenth parallel, which we went along rigorously.

On January 13, arriving in the Timor Sea, Captain Nemo raised the island of that name at longitude 122 degrees.

This island, whose surface area measures 1,625 square leagues, is governed by rajahs.

These aristocrats deem themselves the sons of crocodiles, in other words, descendants with the most exalted origins to which a human being can lay claim.

Accordingly, their scaly ancestors infest the island's rivers and are the subjects of special veneration.

They are sheltered, nurtured, flattered, pampered, and offered a ritual diet of nubile maidens; and woe to the foreigner who lifts a finger against these sacred saurians.

But the Nautilus wanted nothing to do with these nasty animals.

Timor Island was visible for barely an instant at noon while the chief officer determined his position.

I also caught only a glimpse of little Roti Island, part of this same group, whose women have a well-established reputation for beauty in the Malaysian marketplace.

After our position fix, the Nautilus's latitude bearings were modulated to the southwest.

Our prow pointed to the Indian Ocean.

Where would Captain Nemo's fancies take us?

Would he head up to the shores of Asia?

Would he pull nearer to the beaches of Europe?

Unlikely choices for a man who avoided populated areas!

So would he go down south?

Would he double the Cape of Good Hope, then Cape Horn, and push on to the Antarctic pole?

Finally, would he return to the seas of the Pacific, where his Nautilus could navigate freely and easily?

Time would tell.

After cruising along the Cartier, Hibernia, Seringapatam, and Scott reefs, the solid element's last exertions against the liquid element, we were beyond all sight of shore by January 14.

The Nautilus slowed down in an odd manner, and very unpredictable in its ways, it sometimes swam in the midst of the waters, sometimes drifted on their surface.

During this phase of our voyage, Captain Nemo conducted interesting experiments on the different temperatures in various strata of the sea.

Under ordinary conditions, such readings are obtained using some pretty complicated instruments whose findings are dubious to say the least, whether they're thermometric sounding lines, whose glass often shatters under the water's pressure, or those devices based on the varying resistance of metals to electric currents.

The results so obtained can't be adequately double-checked.

By contrast, Captain Nemo would seek the sea's temperature by going himself into its depths, and when he placed his thermometer in contact with the various layers of liquid, he found the sought-for degree immediately and with certainty.

And so, by loading up its ballast tanks, or by sinking obliquely with its slanting fins, the Nautilus successively reached depths of 3,000, 4,000, 5,000, 7,000, 9,000, and 10,000 meters, and the ultimate conclusion from these experiments was that, in all latitudes, the sea had a permanent temperature of 4.5 degrees centigrade at a depth of 1,000 meters.

I watched these experiments with the most intense fascination.

Captain Nemo brought a real passion to them.

I often wondered why he took these observations.

Were they for the benefit of his fellow man?

It was unlikely, because sooner or later his work would perish with him in some unknown sea!

Unless he intended the results of his experiments for me.

But that meant this strange voyage of mine would come to an end, and no such end was in sight.

Be that as it may, Captain Nemo also introduced me to the different data he had obtained on the relative densities of the water in our globe's chief seas.

From this news I derived some personal enlightenment having nothing to do with science.

It happened the morning of January 15.

The captain, with whom I was strolling on the platform, asked me if I knew how salt water differs in density from sea to sea.

I said no, adding that there was a lack of rigorous scientific observations on this subject.

"I've taken such observations,"

he told me, "and I can vouch for their reliability."

"Fine,"

I replied, "but the Nautilus lives in a separate world, and the secrets of its scientists don't make their way ashore."

"You're right, professor,"

he told me after a few moments of silence.

"This is a separate world.

It's as alien to the earth as the planets accompanying our globe around the sun, and we'll never become familiar with the work of scientists on Saturn or Jupiter.

But since fate has linked our two lives, I can reveal the results of my observations to you."

"I'm all attention, captain."

"You're aware, professor, that salt water is denser than fresh water, but this density isn't uniform.

In essence, if I represent the density of fresh water by 1.000, then I find 1.028 for the waters of the Atlantic, 1.026 for the waters of the Pacific, 1.030 for the waters of the Mediterranean--"

Aha, I thought, so he ventures into the Mediterranean?

"--1.018 for the waters of the Ionian Sea, and 1.029 for the waters of the Adriatic."

Assuredly, the Nautilus didn't avoid the heavily traveled seas of Europe, and from this insight I concluded that the ship would take us back--perhaps very soon--to more civilized shores.

I expected Ned Land to greet this news with unfeigned satisfaction.

For several days our work hours were spent in all sorts of experiments, on the degree of salinity in waters of different depths, or on their electric properties, coloration, and transparency, and in every instance Captain Nemo displayed an ingenuity equaled only by his graciousness toward me.

Then I saw no more of him for some days and again lived on board in seclusion.

On January 16 the Nautilus seemed to have fallen asleep just a few meters beneath the surface of the water.

Its electric equipment had been turned off, and the motionless propeller let it ride with the waves.

I assumed that the crew were busy with interior repairs, required by the engine's strenuous mechanical action.

My companions and I then witnessed an unusual sight.

The panels in the lounge were open, and since the Nautilus's beacon was off, a hazy darkness reigned in the midst of the waters.

Covered with heavy clouds, the stormy sky gave only the faintest light to the ocean's upper strata.

I was observing the state of the sea under these conditions, and even the largest fish were nothing more than ill-defined shadows, when the Nautilus was suddenly transferred into broad daylight.

At first I thought the beacon had gone back on and was casting its electric light into the liquid mass.

I was mistaken, and after a hasty examination I discovered my error.

The Nautilus had drifted into the midst of some phosphorescent strata, which, in this darkness, came off as positively dazzling.

This effect was caused by myriads of tiny, luminous animals whose brightness increased when they glided over the metal hull of our submersible.

In the midst of these luminous sheets of water, I then glimpsed flashes of light, like those seen inside a blazing furnace from streams of molten lead or from masses of metal brought to a white heat--flashes so intense that certain areas of the light became shadows by comparison, in a fiery setting from which every shadow should seemingly have been banished.

No, this was no longer the calm emission of our usual lighting!

This light throbbed with unprecedented vigor and activity!

You sensed that it was alive!

In essence, it was a cluster of countless open-sea infusoria, of noctiluca an eighth of an inch wide, actual globules of transparent jelly equipped with a threadlike tentacle, up to 25,000 of which have been counted in thirty cubic centimeters of water.

And the power of their light was increased by those glimmers unique to medusas, starfish, common jellyfish, angel-wing clams, and other phosphorescent zoophytes, which were saturated with grease from organic matter decomposed by the sea, and perhaps with mucus secreted by fish.

For several hours the Nautilus drifted in this brilliant tide, and our wonderment grew when we saw huge marine animals cavorting in it, like the fire-dwelling salamanders of myth.

In the midst of these flames that didn't burn, I could see swift, elegant porpoises, the tireless pranksters of the seas, and sailfish three meters long, those shrewd heralds of hurricanes, whose fearsome broadswords sometimes banged against the lounge window.

Then smaller fish appeared: miscellaneous triggerfish, leather jacks, unicornfish, and a hundred others that left stripes on this luminous atmosphere in their course.

Some magic lay behind this dazzling sight!

Perhaps some atmospheric condition had intensified this phenomenon?

Perhaps a storm had been unleashed on the surface of the waves?

But only a few meters down, the Nautilus felt no tempest's fury, and the ship rocked peacefully in the midst of the calm waters.

And so it went, some new wonder constantly delighting us.

Conseil observed and classified his zoophytes, articulates, mollusks, and fish.

The days passed quickly, and I no longer kept track of them.

Ned, as usual, kept looking for changes of pace from our standard fare.

Like actual snails, we were at home in our shell, and I can vouch that it's easy to turn into a full-fledged snail.

So this way of living began to seem simple and natural to us, and we no longer envisioned a different lifestyle on the surface of the planet earth, when something happened to remind us of our strange circumstances.

On January 18 the Nautilus lay in longitude 105 degrees and latitude 15 degrees south.

The weather was threatening, the sea rough and billowy.

The wind was blowing a strong gust from the east.

The barometer, which had been falling for some days, forecast an approaching struggle of the elements.

I had climbed onto the platform just as the chief officer was taking his readings of hour angles.

Out of habit I waited for him to pronounce his daily phrase.

But that day it was replaced by a different phrase, just as incomprehensible.

Almost at once I saw Captain Nemo appear, lift his spyglass, and inspect the horizon.

For some minutes the captain stood motionless, rooted to the spot contained within the field of his lens.

Then he lowered his spyglass and exchanged about ten words with his chief officer.

The latter seemed to be in the grip of an excitement he tried in vain to control.

More in command of himself, Captain Nemo remained cool.

Furthermore, he seemed to be raising certain objections that his chief officer kept answering with flat assurances.

At least that's what I gathered from their differences in tone and gesture.

As for me, I stared industriously in the direction under observation but without spotting a thing.

Sky and water merged into a perfectly clean horizon line.

Meanwhile Captain Nemo strolled from one end of the platform to the other, not glancing at me, perhaps not even seeing me.

His step was firm but less regular than usual.

Sometimes he would stop, cross his arms over his chest, and observe the sea.

What could he be looking for over that immense expanse?

By then the Nautilus lay hundreds of miles from the nearest coast!

The chief officer kept lifting his spyglass and stubbornly examining the horizon, walking up and down, stamping his foot, in his nervous agitation a sharp contrast to his superior.

But this mystery would inevitably be cleared up, and soon, because Captain Nemo gave orders to increase speed; at once the engine stepped up its drive power, setting the propeller in swifter rotation.

Just then the chief officer drew the captain's attention anew.

The latter interrupted his strolling and aimed his spyglass at the point indicated.

He observed it a good while.

As for me, deeply puzzled, I went below to the lounge and brought back an excellent long-range telescope I habitually used.

Leaning my elbows on the beacon housing, which jutted from the stern of the platform, I got set to scour that whole stretch of sky and sea.

But no sooner had I peered into the eyepiece than the instrument was snatched from my hands.

I spun around.

Captain Nemo was standing before me, but I almost didn't recognize him.

His facial features were transfigured.

Gleaming with dark fire, his eyes had shrunk beneath his frowning brow.

His teeth were half bared.

His rigid body, clenched fists, and head drawn between his shoulders, all attested to a fierce hate breathing from every pore.

He didn't move.

My spyglass fell from his hand and rolled at his feet.

Had I accidentally caused these symptoms of anger?

Did this incomprehensible individual think I had detected some secret forbidden to guests on the Nautilus?

No!

I wasn't the subject of his hate because he wasn't even looking at me; his eyes stayed stubbornly focused on that inscrutable point of the horizon.

Finally Captain Nemo regained his self-control.

His facial appearance, so profoundly changed, now resumed its usual calm.

He addressed a few words to his chief officer in their strange language, then he turned to me: "Professor Aronnax,"

he told me in a tone of some urgency, "I ask that you now honor one of the binding agreements between us."

"Which one, captain?"

"You and your companions must be placed in confinement until I see fit to set you free."

"You're in command,"

I answered, gaping at him.

"But may I address a question to you?"

"You may not, sir."

After that, I stopped objecting and started obeying, since resistance was useless.

I went below to the cabin occupied by Ned Land and Conseil, and I informed them of the captain's decision.

I'll let the reader decide how this news was received by the Canadian.

In any case, there was no time for explanations.

Four crewmen were waiting at the door, and they led us to the cell where we had spent our first night aboard the Nautilus.

Ned Land tried to lodge a complaint, but the only answer he got was a door shut in his face.

"Will master tell me what this means?"

Conseil asked me.

I told my companions what had happened.

They were as astonished as I was, but no wiser.

Then I sank into deep speculation, and Captain Nemo's strange facial seizure kept haunting me.

I was incapable of connecting two ideas in logical order, and I had strayed into the most absurd hypotheses, when I was snapped out of my mental struggles by these words from Ned Land: "Well, look here!

Lunch is served!"

Indeed, the table had been laid.

Apparently Captain Nemo had given this order at the same time he commanded the Nautilus to pick up speed.

"Will master allow me to make him a recommendation?"

Conseil asked me.

"Yes, my boy,"

I replied.

"Well, master needs to eat his lunch!

It's prudent, because we have no idea what the future holds."

"You're right, Conseil."

"Unfortunately,"

Ned Land said, "they've only given us the standard menu."

"Ned my friend,"

Conseil answered, "what would you say if they'd given us no lunch at all?"

This dose of sanity cut the harpooner's complaints clean off.

We sat down at the table.

Our meal proceeded pretty much in silence.

I ate very little.

Conseil, everlastingly prudent, "force-fed"

himself; and despite the menu, Ned Land didn't waste a bite.

Then, lunch over, each of us propped himself in a corner.

Just then the luminous globe lighting our cell went out, leaving us in profound darkness.

Ned Land soon dozed off, and to my astonishment, Conseil also fell into a heavy slumber.

I was wondering what could have caused this urgent need for sleep, when I felt a dense torpor saturate my brain.

I tried to keep my eyes open, but they closed in spite of me.

I was in the grip of anguished hallucinations.

Obviously some sleep-inducing substance had been laced into the food we'd just eaten!

So imprisonment wasn't enough to conceal Captain Nemo's plans from us-- sleep was needed as well!

Then I heard the hatches close.

The sea's undulations, which had been creating a gentle rocking motion, now ceased.

Had the Nautilus left the surface of the ocean?

Was it reentering the motionless strata deep in the sea?

I tried to fight off this drowsiness.

It was impossible.

My breathing grew weaker.

I felt a mortal chill freeze my dull, nearly paralyzed limbs.

Like little domes of lead, my lids fell over my eyes.

I couldn't raise them.

A morbid sleep, full of hallucinations, seized my whole being.

Then the visions disappeared and left me in utter oblivion.

The Coral Realm THE NEXT DAY I woke up with my head unusually clear.

Much to my surprise, I was in my stateroom.

No doubt my companions had been put back in their cabin without noticing it any more than I had.

Like me, they would have no idea what took place during the night, and to unravel this mystery I could count only on some future happenstance.

I then considered leaving my stateroom.

Was I free or still a prisoner?

Perfectly free.

I opened my door, headed down the gangways, and climbed the central companionway.

Hatches that had been closed the day before were now open.

I arrived on the platform.

Ned Land and Conseil were there waiting for me.

I questioned them.

They knew nothing.

Lost in a heavy sleep of which they had no memory, they were quite startled to be back in their cabin.

As for the Nautilus, it seemed as tranquil and mysterious as ever.

It was cruising on the surface of the waves at a moderate speed.

Nothing seemed to have changed on board.

Ned Land observed the sea with his penetrating eyes.

It was deserted.

The Canadian sighted nothing new on the horizon, neither sail nor shore.

A breeze was blowing noisily from the west, and disheveled by the wind, long billows made the submersible roll very noticeably.

After renewing its air, the Nautilus stayed at an average depth of fifteen meters, enabling it to return quickly to the surface of the waves.

And, contrary to custom, it executed such a maneuver several times during that day of January 19.

The chief officer would then climb onto the platform, and his usual phrase would ring through the ship's interior.

As for Captain Nemo, he didn't appear.

Of the other men on board, I saw only my emotionless steward, who served me with his usual mute efficiency.

Near two o'clock I was busy organizing my notes in the lounge, when the captain opened the door and appeared.

I bowed to him.

He gave me an almost imperceptible bow in return, without saying a word to me.

I resumed my work, hoping he might give me some explanation of the previous afternoon's events.

He did nothing of the sort.

I stared at him.

His face looked exhausted; his reddened eyes hadn't been refreshed by sleep; his facial features expressed profound sadness, real chagrin.

He walked up and down, sat and stood, picked up a book at random, discarded it immediately, consulted his instruments without taking his customary notes, and seemed unable to rest easy for an instant.

Finally he came over to me and said: "Are you a physician, Professor Aronnax?"

This inquiry was so unexpected that I stared at him a good while without replying.

"Are you a physician?"

he repeated.

"Several of your scientific colleagues took their degrees in medicine, such as Gratiolet, Moquin-Tandon, and others."

"That's right,"

I said, "I am a doctor, I used to be on call at the hospitals.

I was in practice for several years before joining the museum."

"Excellent, sir."

My reply obviously pleased Captain Nemo.

But not knowing what he was driving at, I waited for further questions, ready to reply as circumstances dictated.

"Professor Aronnax,"

the captain said to me, "would you consent to give your medical attentions to one of my men?"

"Someone is sick?"

"Yes."

"I'm ready to go with you."

"Come."

I admit that my heart was pounding.

Lord knows why, but I saw a definite connection between this sick crewman and yesterday's happenings, and the mystery of those events concerned me at least as much as the man's sickness.

Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus's stern and invited me into a cabin located next to the sailors' quarters.

On a bed there lay a man some forty years old, with strongly molded features, the very image of an Anglo-Saxon.

I bent over him.

Not only was he sick, he was wounded.

Swathed in blood-soaked linen, his head was resting on a folded pillow.

I undid the linen bandages, while the wounded man gazed with great staring eyes and let me proceed without making a single complaint.

It was a horrible wound.

The cranium had been smashed open by some blunt instrument, leaving the naked brains exposed, and the cerebral matter had suffered deep abrasions.

Blood clots had formed in this dissolving mass, taking on the color of wine dregs.

Both contusion and concussion of the brain had occurred.

The sick man's breathing was labored, and muscle spasms quivered in his face.

Cerebral inflammation was complete and had brought on a paralysis of movement and sensation.

I took the wounded man's pulse.

It was intermittent.

The body's extremities were already growing cold, and I saw that death was approaching without any possibility of my holding it in check.

After dressing the poor man's wound, I redid the linen bandages around his head, and I turned to Captain Nemo.

"How did he get this wound?"

I asked him.

"That's not important,"

the captain replied evasively.

"The Nautilus suffered a collision that cracked one of the engine levers, and it struck this man.

My chief officer was standing beside him.

This man leaped forward to intercept the blow.

A brother lays down his life for his brother, a friend for his friend, what could be simpler?

That's the law for everyone on board the Nautilus.

But what's your diagnosis of his condition?"

I hesitated to speak my mind.

"You may talk freely,"

the captain told me.

"This man doesn't understand French."

I took a last look at the wounded man, then I replied: "This man will be dead in two hours."

"Nothing can save him?"

"Nothing."

Captain Nemo clenched his fists, and tears slid from his eyes, which I had thought incapable of weeping.

For a few moments more I observed the dying man, whose life was ebbing little by little.

He grew still more pale under the electric light that bathed his deathbed.

I looked at his intelligent head, furrowed with premature wrinkles that misfortune, perhaps misery, had etched long before.

I was hoping to detect the secret of his life in the last words that might escape from his lips!

"You may go, Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo told me.

I left the captain in the dying man's cabin and I repaired to my stateroom, very moved by this scene.

All day long I was aquiver with gruesome forebodings.

That night I slept poorly, and between my fitful dreams, I thought I heard a distant moaning, like a funeral dirge.

Was it a prayer for the dead, murmured in that language I couldn't understand?

The next morning I climbed on deck.

Captain Nemo was already there.

As soon as he saw me, he came over.

"Professor,"

he said to me, "would it be convenient for you to make an underwater excursion today?"

"With my companions?"

I asked.

"If they're agreeable."

"We're yours to command, captain."

"Then kindly put on your diving suits."

As for the dead or dying man, he hadn't come into the picture.

I rejoined Ned Land and Conseil.

I informed them of Captain Nemo's proposition.

Conseil was eager to accept, and this time the Canadian proved perfectly amenable to going with us.

It was eight o'clock in the morning.

By 8:30 we were suited up for this new stroll and equipped with our two devices for lighting and breathing.

The double door opened, and accompanied by Captain Nemo with a dozen crewmen following, we set foot on the firm seafloor where the Nautilus was resting, ten meters down.

A gentle slope gravitated to an uneven bottom whose depth was about fifteen fathoms.

This bottom was completely different from the one I had visited during my first excursion under the waters of the Pacific Ocean.

Here I saw no fine-grained sand, no underwater prairies, not one open-sea forest.

I immediately recognized the wondrous region in which Captain Nemo did the honors that day.

It was the coral realm.

In the zoophyte branch, class Alcyonaria, one finds the order Gorgonaria, which contains three groups: sea fans, isidian polyps, and coral polyps.

It's in this last that precious coral belongs, an unusual substance that, at different times, has been classified in the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms.

Medicine to the ancients, jewelry to the moderns, it wasn't decisively placed in the animal kingdom until 1694, by Peysonnel of Marseilles.

A coral is a unit of tiny animals assembled over a polypary that's brittle and stony in nature.

These polyps have a unique generating mechanism that reproduces them via the budding process, and they have an individual existence while also participating in a communal life.

Hence they embody a sort of natural socialism.

I was familiar with the latest research on this bizarre zoophyte-- which turns to stone while taking on a tree form, as some naturalists have very aptly observed--and nothing could have been more fascinating to me than to visit one of these petrified forests that nature has planted on the bottom of the sea.

We turned on our Ruhmkorff devices and went along a coral shoal in the process of forming, which, given time, will someday close off this whole part of the Indian Ocean.

Our path was bordered by hopelessly tangled bushes, formed from snarls of shrubs all covered with little star-shaped, white-streaked flowers.

Only, contrary to plants on shore, these tree forms become attached to rocks on the seafloor by heading from top to bottom.

Our lights produced a thousand delightful effects while playing over these brightly colored boughs.

I fancied I saw these cylindrical, membrane-filled tubes trembling beneath the water's undulations.

I was tempted to gather their fresh petals, which were adorned with delicate tentacles, some newly in bloom, others barely opened, while nimble fish with fluttering fins brushed past them like flocks of birds.

But if my hands came near the moving flowers of these sensitive, lively creatures, an alarm would instantly sound throughout the colony.

The white petals retracted into their red sheaths, the flowers vanished before my eyes, and the bush changed into a chunk of stony nipples.

Sheer chance had placed me in the presence of the most valuable specimens of this zoophyte.

This coral was the equal of those fished up from the Mediterranean off the Barbary Coast or the shores of France and Italy.

With its bright colors, it lived up to those poetic names of blood flower and blood foam that the industry confers on its finest exhibits.

Coral sells for as much as 500 francs per kilogram, and in this locality the liquid strata hid enough to make the fortunes of a whole host of coral fishermen.

This valuable substance often merges with other polyparies, forming compact, hopelessly tangled units known as "macciota,"

and I noted some wonderful pink samples of this coral.

But as the bushes shrank, the tree forms magnified.

Actual petrified thickets and long alcoves from some fantastic school of architecture kept opening up before our steps.

Captain Nemo entered beneath a dark gallery whose gentle slope took us to a depth of 100 meters.

The light from our glass coils produced magical effects at times, lingering on the wrinkled roughness of some natural arch, or some overhang suspended like a chandelier, which our lamps flecked with fiery sparks.

Amid these shrubs of precious coral, I observed other polyps no less unusual: melita coral, rainbow coral with jointed outgrowths, then a few tufts of genus Corallina, some green and others red, actually a type of seaweed encrusted with limestone salts, which, after long disputes, naturalists have finally placed in the vegetable kingdom.

But as one intellectual has remarked, "Here, perhaps, is the actual point where life rises humbly out of slumbering stone, but without breaking away from its crude starting point."

Finally, after two hours of walking, we reached a depth of about 300 meters, in other words, the lowermost limit at which coral can begin to form.

But here it was no longer some isolated bush or a modest grove of low timber.

It was an immense forest, huge mineral vegetation, enormous petrified trees linked by garlands of elegant hydras from the genus Plumularia, those tropical creepers of the sea, all decked out in shades and gleams.

We passed freely under their lofty boughs, lost up in the shadows of the waves, while at our feet organ-pipe coral, stony coral, star coral, fungus coral, and sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia formed a carpet of flowers all strewn with dazzling gems.

What an indescribable sight!

Oh, if only we could share our feelings!

Why were we imprisoned behind these masks of metal and glass!

Why were we forbidden to talk with each other!

At least let us lead the lives of the fish that populate this liquid element, or better yet, the lives of amphibians, which can spend long hours either at sea or on shore, traveling through their double domain as their whims dictate!

Meanwhile Captain Nemo had called a halt.

My companions and I stopped walking, and turning around, I saw the crewmen form a semicircle around their leader.

Looking with greater care, I observed that four of them were carrying on their shoulders an object that was oblong in shape.

At this locality we stood in the center of a huge clearing surrounded by the tall tree forms of this underwater forest.

Our lamps cast a sort of brilliant twilight over the area, making inordinately long shadows on the seafloor.

Past the boundaries of the clearing, the darkness deepened again, relieved only by little sparkles given off by the sharp crests of coral.

Ned Land and Conseil stood next to me.

We stared, and it dawned on me that I was about to witness a strange scene.

Observing the seafloor, I saw that it swelled at certain points from low bulges that were encrusted with limestone deposits and arranged with a symmetry that betrayed the hand of man.

In the middle of the clearing, on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks, there stood a cross of coral, extending long arms you would have thought were made of petrified blood.

At a signal from Captain Nemo, one of his men stepped forward and, a few feet from this cross, detached a mattock from his belt and began to dig a hole.

I finally understood!

This clearing was a cemetery, this hole a grave, that oblong object the body of the man who must have died during the night!

Captain Nemo and his men had come to bury their companion in this communal resting place on the inaccessible ocean floor!

No!

My mind was reeling as never before!

Never had ideas of such impact raced through my brain!

I didn't want to see what my eyes saw!

Meanwhile the grave digging went slowly.

Fish fled here and there as their retreat was disturbed.

I heard the pick ringing on the limestone soil, its iron tip sometimes giving off sparks when it hit a stray piece of flint on the sea bottom.

The hole grew longer, wider, and soon was deep enough to receive the body.

Then the pallbearers approached.

Wrapped in white fabric made from filaments of the fan mussel, the body was lowered into its watery grave.

Captain Nemo, arms crossed over his chest, knelt in a posture of prayer, as did all the friends of him who had loved them.

.

.

.

My two companions and I bowed reverently.

The grave was then covered over with the rubble dug from the seafloor, and it formed a low mound.

When this was done, Captain Nemo and his men stood up; then they all approached the grave, sank again on bended knee, and extended their hands in a sign of final farewell.

.

.

.

Then the funeral party went back up the path to the Nautilus, returning beneath the arches of the forest, through the thickets, along the coral bushes, going steadily higher.

Finally the ship's rays appeared.

Their luminous trail guided us to the Nautilus.

By one o'clock we had returned.

After changing clothes, I climbed onto the platform, and in the grip of dreadfully obsessive thoughts, I sat next to the beacon.

Captain Nemo rejoined me.

I stood up and said to him: "So, as I predicted, that man died during the night?"

"Yes, Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo replied.

"And now he rests beside his companions in that coral cemetery?"

"Yes, forgotten by the world but not by us!

We dig the graves, then entrust the polyps with sealing away our dead for eternity!"

And with a sudden gesture, the captain hid his face in his clenched fists, vainly trying to hold back a sob.

Then he added: "There lies our peaceful cemetery, hundreds of feet beneath the surface of the waves!"

"At least, captain, your dead can sleep serenely there, out of the reach of sharks!"

"Yes, sir,"

Captain Nemo replied solemnly, "of sharks and men!"

END OF THE FIRST PART *Author's Note: About 106 meters.

An English foot is only 30.4 centimeters.

*German: "Bulletin."

Ed.

*Author's Note: A pier is a type of wharf expressly set aside for an individual vessel.

*Author's Note: Tenders are small steamboats that assist the big liners.

*Author's Note: A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americans are forever carrying around.

*Author's Note: A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.

*Latin: nemo means "no one."

Ed.

*Latin: "in a class by itself."

Ed.

**Author's Note: And sure enough, there's now talk of such a discovery, in which a new set of levers generates considerable power.

Did its inventor meet up with Captain Nemo?

*Author's Note: "Ladyfingers"

are small, thin, white clouds with ragged edges.

*Latin: a spigot "just for that purpose."

Ed.

*Latin: "troubled dreams."

Ed.

SECOND PART ______________________________________________________________ The Indian Ocean NOW WE BEGIN the second part of this voyage under the seas.

The first ended in that moving scene at the coral cemetery, which left a profound impression on my mind.

And so Captain Nemo would live out his life entirely in the heart of this immense sea, and even his grave lay ready in its impenetrable depths.

There the last sleep of the Nautilus's occupants, friends bound together in death as in life, would be disturbed by no monster of the deep!

"No man either!"

the captain had added.

Always that same fierce, implacable defiance of human society!

As for me, I was no longer content with the hypotheses that satisfied Conseil.

That fine lad persisted in seeing the Nautilus's commander as merely one of those unappreciated scientists who repay humanity's indifference with contempt.

For Conseil, the captain was still a misunderstood genius who, tired of the world's deceptions, had been driven to take refuge in this inaccessible environment where he was free to follow his instincts.

But to my mind, this hypothesis explained only one side of Captain Nemo.

In fact, the mystery of that last afternoon when we were locked in prison and put to sleep, the captain's violent precaution of snatching from my grasp a spyglass poised to scour the horizon, and the fatal wound given that man during some unexplained collision suffered by the Nautilus, all led me down a plain trail.

No!

Captain Nemo wasn't content simply to avoid humanity!

His fearsome submersible served not only his quest for freedom, but also, perhaps, it was used in lord-knows-what schemes of dreadful revenge.

Right now, nothing is clear to me, I still glimpse only glimmers in the dark, and I must limit my pen, as it were, to taking dictation from events.

But nothing binds us to Captain Nemo.

He believes that escaping from the Nautilus is impossible.

We are not even constrained by our word of honor.

No promises fetter us.

We're simply captives, prisoners masquerading under the name "guests"

for the sake of everyday courtesy.

Even so, Ned Land hasn't given up all hope of recovering his freedom.

He's sure to take advantage of the first chance that comes his way.

No doubt I will do likewise.

And yet I will feel some regret at making off with the Nautilus's secrets, so generously unveiled for us by Captain Nemo!

Because, ultimately, should we detest or admire this man?

Is he the persecutor or the persecuted?

And in all honesty, before I leave him forever, I want to finish this underwater tour of the world, whose first stages have been so magnificent.

I want to observe the full series of these wonders gathered under the seas of our globe.

I want to see what no man has seen yet, even if I must pay for this insatiable curiosity with my life!

What are my discoveries to date?

Nothing, relatively speaking-- since so far we've covered only 6,000 leagues across the Pacific!

Nevertheless, I'm well aware that the Nautilus is drawing near to populated shores, and if some chance for salvation becomes available to us, it would be sheer cruelty to sacrifice my companions to my passion for the unknown.

I must go with them, perhaps even guide them.

But will this opportunity ever arise?

The human being, robbed of his free will, craves such an opportunity; but the scientist, forever inquisitive, dreads it.

That day, January 21, 1868, the chief officer went at noon to take the sun's altitude.

I climbed onto the platform, lit a cigar, and watched him at work.

It seemed obvious to me that this man didn't understand French, because I made several remarks in a loud voice that were bound to provoke him to some involuntary show of interest had he understood them; but he remained mute and emotionless.

While he took his sights with his sextant, one of the Nautilus's sailors-- that muscular man who had gone with us to Crespo Island during our first underwater excursion--came up to clean the glass panes of the beacon.

I then examined the fittings of this mechanism, whose power was increased a hundredfold by biconvex lenses that were designed like those in a lighthouse and kept its rays productively focused.

This electric lamp was so constructed as to yield its maximum illuminating power.

In essence, its light was generated in a vacuum, insuring both its steadiness and intensity.

Such a vacuum also reduced wear on the graphite points between which the luminous arc expanded.

This was an important savings for Captain Nemo, who couldn't easily renew them.

But under these conditions, wear and tear were almost nonexistent.

When the Nautilus was ready to resume its underwater travels, I went below again to the lounge.

The hatches closed once more, and our course was set due west.

We then plowed the waves of the Indian Ocean, vast liquid plains with an area of 550,000,000 hectares, whose waters are so transparent it makes you dizzy to lean over their surface.

There the Nautilus generally drifted at a depth between 100 and 200 meters.

It behaved in this way for some days.

To anyone without my grand passion for the sea, these hours would surely have seemed long and monotonous; but my daily strolls on the platform where I was revived by the life-giving ocean air, the sights in the rich waters beyond the lounge windows, the books to be read in the library, and the composition of my memoirs, took up all my time and left me without a moment of weariness or boredom.

All in all, we enjoyed a highly satisfactory state of health.

The diet on board agreed with us perfectly, and for my part, I could easily have gone without those changes of pace that Ned Land, in a spirit of protest, kept taxing his ingenuity to supply us.

What's more, in this constant temperature we didn't even have to worry about catching colds.

Besides, the ship had a good stock of the madrepore Dendrophylia, known in Provence by the name sea fennel, and a poultice made from the dissolved flesh of its polyps will furnish an excellent cough medicine.

For some days we saw a large number of aquatic birds with webbed feet, known as gulls or sea mews.

Some were skillfully slain, and when cooked in a certain fashion, they make a very acceptable platter of water game.

Among the great wind riders--carried over long distances from every shore and resting on the waves from their exhausting flights-- I spotted some magnificent albatross, birds belonging to the Longipennes (long-winged) family, whose discordant calls sound like the braying of an ass.

The Totipalmes (fully webbed) family was represented by swift frigate birds, nimbly catching fish at the surface, and by numerous tropic birds of the genus Phaeton, among others the red-tailed tropic bird, the size of a pigeon, its white plumage shaded with pink tints that contrasted with its dark-hued wings.

The Nautilus's nets hauled up several types of sea turtle from the hawksbill genus with arching backs whose scales are highly prized.

Diving easily, these reptiles can remain a good while underwater by closing the fleshy valves located at the external openings of their nasal passages.

When they were captured, some hawksbills were still asleep inside their carapaces, a refuge from other marine animals.

The flesh of these turtles was nothing memorable, but their eggs made an excellent feast.

As for fish, they always filled us with wonderment when, staring through the open panels, we could unveil the secrets of their aquatic lives.

I noted several species I hadn't previously been able to observe.

I'll mention chiefly some trunkfish unique to the Red Sea, the sea of the East Indies, and that part of the ocean washing the coasts of equinoctial America.

Like turtles, armadillos, sea urchins, and crustaceans, these fish are protected by armor plate that's neither chalky nor stony but actual bone.

Sometimes this armor takes the shape of a solid triangle, sometimes that of a solid quadrangle.

Among the triangular type, I noticed some half a decimeter long, with brown tails, yellow fins, and wholesome, exquisitely tasty flesh; I even recommend that they be acclimatized to fresh water, a change, incidentally, that a number of saltwater fish can make with ease.

I'll also mention some quadrangular trunkfish topped by four large protuberances along the back; trunkfish sprinkled with white spots on the underside of the body, which make good house pets like certain birds; boxfish armed with stings formed by extensions of their bony crusts, and whose odd grunting has earned them the nickname "sea pigs"; then some trunkfish known as dromedaries, with tough, leathery flesh and big conical humps.

From the daily notes kept by Mr.

Conseil, I also retrieve certain fish from the genus Tetradon unique to these seas: southern puffers with red backs and white chests distinguished by three lengthwise rows of filaments, and jugfish, seven inches long, decked out in the brightest colors.

Then, as specimens of other genera, blowfish resembling a dark brown egg, furrowed with white bands, and lacking tails; globefish, genuine porcupines of the sea, armed with stings and able to inflate themselves until they look like a pin cushion bristling with needles; seahorses common to every ocean; flying dragonfish with long snouts and highly distended pectoral fins shaped like wings, which enable them, if not to fly, at least to spring into the air; spatula-shaped paddlefish whose tails are covered with many scaly rings; snipefish with long jaws, excellent animals twenty-five centimeters long and gleaming with the most cheerful colors; bluish gray dragonets with wrinkled heads; myriads of leaping blennies with black stripes and long pectoral fins, gliding over the surface of the water with prodigious speed; delicious sailfish that can hoist their fins in a favorable current like so many unfurled sails; splendid nurseryfish on which nature has lavished yellow, azure, silver, and gold; yellow mackerel with wings made of filaments; bullheads forever spattered with mud, which make distinct hissing sounds; sea robins whose livers are thought to be poisonous; ladyfish that can flutter their eyelids; finally, archerfish with long, tubular snouts, real oceangoing flycatchers, armed with a rifle unforeseen by either Remington or Chassepot: it slays insects by shooting them with a simple drop of water.

From the eighty-ninth fish genus in Lacpde's system of classification, belonging to his second subclass of bony fish (characterized by gill covers and a bronchial membrane), I noted some scorpionfish whose heads are adorned with stings and which have only one dorsal fin; these animals are covered with small scales, or have none at all, depending on the subgenus to which they belong.

The second subgenus gave us some Didactylus specimens three to four decimeters long, streaked with yellow, their heads having a phantasmagoric appearance.

As for the first subgenus, it furnished several specimens of that bizarre fish aptly nicknamed "toadfish,"

whose big head is sometimes gouged with deep cavities, sometimes swollen with protuberances; bristling with stings and strewn with nodules, it sports hideously irregular horns; its body and tail are adorned with callosities; its stings can inflict dangerous injuries; it's repulsive and horrible.

From January 21 to the 23rd, the Nautilus traveled at the rate of 250 leagues in twenty-four hours, hence 540 miles at twenty-two miles per hour.

If, during our trip, we were able to identify these different varieties of fish, it's because they were attracted by our electric light and tried to follow alongside; but most of them were outdistanced by our speed and soon fell behind; temporarily, however, a few managed to keep pace in the Nautilus's waters.

On the morning of the 24th, in latitude 12 degrees 5' south and longitude 94 degrees 33', we raised Keeling Island, a madreporic upheaving planted with magnificent coconut trees, which had been visited by Mr.

Darwin and Captain Fitzroy.

The Nautilus cruised along a short distance off the shore of this desert island.

Our dragnets brought up many specimens of polyps and echinoderms plus some unusual shells from the branch Mollusca.

Captain Nemo's treasures were enhanced by some valuable exhibits from the delphinula snail species, to which I joined some pointed star coral, a sort of parasitic polypary that often attaches itself to seashells.

Soon Keeling Island disappeared below the horizon, and our course was set to the northwest, toward the tip of the Indian peninsula.

"Civilization!"

Ned Land told me that day.

"Much better than those Papuan Islands where we ran into more savages than venison!

On this Indian shore, professor, there are roads and railways, English, French, and Hindu villages.

We wouldn't go five miles without bumping into a fellow countryman.

Come on now, isn't it time for our sudden departure from Captain Nemo?"

"No, no, Ned,"

I replied in a very firm tone.

"Let's ride it out, as you seafaring fellows say.

The Nautilus is approaching populated areas.

It's going back toward Europe, let it take us there.

After we arrive in home waters, we can do as we see fit.

Besides, I don't imagine Captain Nemo will let us go hunting on the coasts of Malabar or Coromandel as he did in the forests of New Guinea."

"Well, sir, can't we manage without his permission?"

I didn't answer the Canadian.

I wanted no arguments.

Deep down, I was determined to fully exploit the good fortune that had put me on board the Nautilus.

After leaving Keeling Island, our pace got generally slower.

It also got more unpredictable, often taking us to great depths.

Several times we used our slanting fins, which internal levers could set at an oblique angle to our waterline.

Thus we went as deep as two or three kilometers down but without ever verifying the lowest depths of this sea near India, which soundings of 13,000 meters have been unable to reach.

As for the temperature in these lower strata, the thermometer always and invariably indicated 4 degrees centigrade.

I merely observed that in the upper layers, the water was always colder over shallows than in the open sea.

On January 25, the ocean being completely deserted, the Nautilus spent the day on the surface, churning the waves with its powerful propeller and making them spurt to great heights.

Under these conditions, who wouldn't have mistaken it for a gigantic cetacean?

I spent three-quarters of the day on the platform.

I stared at the sea.

Nothing on the horizon, except near four o'clock in the afternoon a long steamer to the west, running on our opposite tack.

Its masting was visible for an instant, but it couldn't have seen the Nautilus because we were lying too low in the water.

I imagine that steamboat belonged to the Peninsular & Oriental line, which provides service from the island of Ceylon to Sidney, also calling at King George Sound and Melbourne.

At five o'clock in the afternoon, just before that brief twilight that links day with night in tropical zones, Conseil and I marveled at an unusual sight.

It was a delightful animal whose discovery, according to the ancients, is a sign of good luck.

Aristotle, Athenaeus, Pliny, and Oppian studied its habits and lavished on its behalf all the scientific poetry of Greece and Italy.

They called it "nautilus"

and "pompilius."

But modern science has not endorsed these designations, and this mollusk is now known by the name argonaut.

Anyone consulting Conseil would soon learn from the gallant lad that the branch Mollusca is divided into five classes; that the first class features the Cephalopoda (whose members are sometimes naked, sometimes covered with a shell), which consists of two families, the Dibranchiata and the Tetrabranchiata, which are distinguished by their number of gills; that the family Dibranchiata includes three genera, the argonaut, the squid, and the cuttlefish, and that the family Tetrabranchiata contains only one genus, the nautilus.

After this catalog, if some recalcitrant listener confuses the argonaut, which is acetabuliferous (in other words, a bearer of suction tubes), with the nautilus, which is tentaculiferous (a bearer of tentacles), it will be simply unforgivable.

Now, it was a school of argonauts then voyaging on the surface of the ocean.

We could count several hundred of them.

They belonged to that species of argonaut covered with protuberances and exclusive to the seas near India.

These graceful mollusks were swimming backward by means of their locomotive tubes, sucking water into these tubes and then expelling it.

Six of their eight tentacles were long, thin, and floated on the water, while the other two were rounded into palms and spread to the wind like light sails.

I could see perfectly their undulating, spiral-shaped shells, which Cuvier aptly compared to an elegant cockleboat.

It's an actual boat indeed.

It transports the animal that secretes it without the animal sticking to it.

"The argonaut is free to leave its shell,"

I told Conseil, "but it never does."

"Not unlike Captain Nemo,"

Conseil replied sagely.

"Which is why he should have christened his ship the Argonaut."

For about an hour the Nautilus cruised in the midst of this school of mollusks.

Then, lord knows why, they were gripped with a sudden fear.

As if at a signal, every sail was abruptly lowered; arms folded, bodies contracted, shells turned over by changing their center of gravity, and the whole flotilla disappeared under the waves.

It was instantaneous, and no squadron of ships ever maneuvered with greater togetherness.

Just then night fell suddenly, and the waves barely surged in the breeze, spreading placidly around the Nautilus's side plates.

The next day, January 26, we cut the equator on the 82nd meridian and we reentered the northern hemisphere.

During that day a fearsome school of sharks provided us with an escort.

Dreadful animals that teem in these seas and make them extremely dangerous.

There were Port Jackson sharks with a brown back, a whitish belly, and eleven rows of teeth, bigeye sharks with necks marked by a large black spot encircled in white and resembling an eye, and Isabella sharks whose rounded snouts were strewn with dark speckles.

Often these powerful animals rushed at the lounge window with a violence less than comforting.

By this point Ned Land had lost all self-control.

He wanted to rise to the surface of the waves and harpoon the monsters, especially certain smooth-hound sharks whose mouths were paved with teeth arranged like a mosaic, and some big five-meter tiger sharks that insisted on personally provoking him.

But the Nautilus soon picked up speed and easily left astern the fastest of these man-eaters.

On January 27, at the entrance to the huge Bay of Bengal, we repeatedly encountered a gruesome sight: human corpses floating on the surface of the waves!

Carried by the Ganges to the high seas, these were deceased Indian villagers who hadn't been fully devoured by vultures, the only morticians in these parts.

But there was no shortage of sharks to assist them with their undertaking chores.

Near seven o'clock in the evening, the Nautilus lay half submerged, navigating in the midst of milky white waves.

As far as the eye could see, the ocean seemed lactified.

Was it an effect of the moon's rays?

No, because the new moon was barely two days old and was still lost below the horizon in the sun's rays.

The entire sky, although lit up by stellar radiation, seemed pitch-black in comparison with the whiteness of these waters.

Conseil couldn't believe his eyes, and he questioned me about the causes of this odd phenomenon.

Luckily I was in a position to answer him.

"That's called a milk sea,"

I told him, "a vast expanse of white waves often seen along the coasts of Amboina and in these waterways."

"But,"

Conseil asked, "could master tell me the cause of this effect, because I presume this water hasn't really changed into milk!"

"No, my boy, and this whiteness that amazes you is merely due to the presence of myriads of tiny creatures called infusoria, a sort of diminutive glowworm that's colorless and gelatinous in appearance, as thick as a strand of hair, and no longer than one-fifth of a millimeter.

Some of these tiny creatures stick together over an area of several leagues."

"Several leagues!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"Yes, my boy, and don't even try to compute the number of these infusoria.

You won't pull it off, because if I'm not mistaken, certain navigators have cruised through milk seas for more than forty miles."

I'm not sure that Conseil heeded my recommendation, because he seemed to be deep in thought, no doubt trying to calculate how many one-fifths of a millimeter are found in forty square miles.

As for me, I continued to observe this phenomenon.

For several hours the Nautilus's spur sliced through these whitish waves, and I watched it glide noiselessly over this soapy water, as if it were cruising through those foaming eddies that a bay's currents and countercurrents sometimes leave between each other.

Near midnight the sea suddenly resumed its usual hue, but behind us all the way to the horizon, the skies kept mirroring the whiteness of those waves and for a good while seemed imbued with the hazy glow of an aurora borealis.

A New Proposition from Captain Nemo ON JANUARY 28, in latitude 9 degrees 4' north, when the Nautilus returned at noon to the surface of the sea, it lay in sight of land some eight miles to the west.

Right off, I observed a cluster of mountains about 2,000 feet high, whose shapes were very whimsically sculpted.

After our position fix, I reentered the lounge, and when our bearings were reported on the chart, I saw that we were off the island of Ceylon, that pearl dangling from the lower lobe of the Indian peninsula.

I went looking in the library for a book about this island, one of the most fertile in the world.

Sure enough, I found a volume entitled Ceylon and the Singhalese by H.

C.

Sirr, Esq.

Reentering the lounge, I first noted the bearings of Ceylon, on which antiquity lavished so many different names.

It was located between latitude 5 degrees 55' and 9 degrees 49' north, and between longitude 79 degrees 42' and 82 degrees 4' east of the meridian of Greenwich; its length is 275 miles; its maximum width, 150 miles; its circumference, 900 miles; its surface area, 24,448 square miles, in other words, a little smaller than that of Ireland.

Just then Captain Nemo and his chief officer appeared.

The captain glanced at the chart.

Then, turning to me: "The island of Ceylon,"

he said, "is famous for its pearl fisheries.

Would you be interested, Professor Aronnax, in visiting one of those fisheries?"

"Certainly, captain."

"Fine.

It's easily done.

Only, when we see the fisheries, we'll see no fishermen.

The annual harvest hasn't yet begun.

No matter.

I'll give orders to make for the Gulf of Mannar, and we'll arrive there late tonight."

The captain said a few words to his chief officer who went out immediately.

Soon the Nautilus reentered its liquid element, and the pressure gauge indicated that it was staying at a depth of thirty feet.

With the chart under my eyes, I looked for the Gulf of Mannar.

I found it by the 9th parallel off the northwestern shores of Ceylon.

It was formed by the long curve of little Mannar Island.

To reach it we had to go all the way up Ceylon's west coast.

"Professor,"

Captain Nemo then told me, "there are pearl fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, the seas of the East Indies, the seas of China and Japan, plus those seas south of the United States, the Gulf of Panama and the Gulf of California; but it's off Ceylon that such fishing reaps its richest rewards.

No doubt we'll be arriving a little early.

Fishermen gather in the Gulf of Mannar only during the month of March, and for thirty days some 300 boats concentrate on the lucrative harvest of these treasures from the sea.

Each boat is manned by ten oarsmen and ten fishermen.

The latter divide into two groups, dive in rotation, and descend to a depth of twelve meters with the help of a heavy stone clutched between their feet and attached by a rope to their boat."

"You mean,"

I said, "that such primitive methods are still all that they use?"

"All,"

Captain Nemo answered me, "although these fisheries belong to the most industrialized people in the world, the English, to whom the Treaty of Amiens granted them in 1802."

"Yet it strikes me that diving suits like yours could perform yeoman service in such work."

"Yes, since those poor fishermen can't stay long underwater.

On his voyage to Ceylon, the Englishman Percival made much of a Kaffir who stayed under five minutes without coming up to the surface, but I find that hard to believe.

I know that some divers can last up to fifty-seven seconds, and highly skillful ones to eighty-seven; but such men are rare, and when the poor fellows climb back on board, the water coming out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood.

I believe the average time underwater that these fishermen can tolerate is thirty seconds, during which they hastily stuff their little nets with all the pearl oysters they can tear loose.

But these fishermen generally don't live to advanced age: their vision weakens, ulcers break out on their eyes, sores form on their bodies, and some are even stricken with apoplexy on the ocean floor."

"Yes,"

I said, "it's a sad occupation, and one that exists only to gratify the whims of fashion.

But tell me, captain, how many oysters can a boat fish up in a workday?"

"About 40,000 to 50,000.

It's even said that in 1814, when the English government went fishing on its own behalf, its divers worked just twenty days and brought up 76,000,000 oysters."

"At least,"

I asked, "the fishermen are well paid, aren't they?"

"Hardly, professor.

In Panama they make just $1.00 per week.

In most places they earn only a penny for each oyster that has a pearl, and they bring up so many that have none!"

"Only one penny to those poor people who make their employers rich!

That's atrocious!"

"On that note, professor,"

Captain Nemo told me, "you and your companions will visit the Mannar oysterbank, and if by chance some eager fisherman arrives early, well, we can watch him at work."

"That suits me, captain."

"By the way, Professor Aronnax, you aren't afraid of sharks, are you?"

"Sharks?"

I exclaimed.

This struck me as a pretty needless question, to say the least.

"Well?"

Captain Nemo went on.

"I admit, captain, I'm not yet on very familiar terms with that genus of fish."

"We're used to them, the rest of us,"

Captain Nemo answered.

"And in time you will be too.

Anyhow, we'll be armed, and on our way we might hunt a man-eater or two.

It's a fascinating sport.

So, professor, I'll see you tomorrow, bright and early."

This said in a carefree tone, Captain Nemo left the lounge.

If you're invited to hunt bears in the Swiss mountains, you might say: "Oh good, I get to go bear hunting tomorrow!"

If you're invited to hunt lions on the Atlas plains or tigers in the jungles of India, you might say: "Ha!

Now's my chance to hunt lions and tigers!"

But if you're invited to hunt sharks in their native element, you might want to think it over before accepting.

As for me, I passed a hand over my brow, where beads of cold sweat were busy forming.

"Let's think this over,"

I said to myself, "and let's take our time.

Hunting otters in underwater forests, as we did in the forests of Crespo Island, is an acceptable activity.

But to roam the bottom of the sea when you're almost certain to meet man-eaters in the neighborhood, that's another story!

I know that in certain countries, particularly the Andaman Islands, Negroes don't hesitate to attack sharks, dagger in one hand and noose in the other; but I also know that many who face those fearsome animals don't come back alive.

Besides, I'm not a Negro, and even if I were a Negro, in this instance I don't think a little hesitation on my part would be out of place."

And there I was, fantasizing about sharks, envisioning huge jaws armed with multiple rows of teeth and capable of cutting a man in half.

I could already feel a definite pain around my pelvic girdle.

And how I resented the offhand manner in which the captain had extended his deplorable invitation!

You would have thought it was an issue of going into the woods on some harmless fox hunt!

"Thank heavens!"

I said to myself.

"Conseil will never want to come along, and that'll be my excuse for not going with the captain."

As for Ned Land, I admit I felt less confident of his wisdom.

Danger, however great, held a perennial attraction for his aggressive nature.

I went back to reading Sirr's book, but I leafed through it mechanically.

Between the lines I kept seeing fearsome, wide-open jaws.

Just then Conseil and the Canadian entered with a calm, even gleeful air.

Little did they know what was waiting for them.

"Ye gods, sir!"

Ned Land told me.

"Your Captain Nemo--the devil take him--has just made us a very pleasant proposition!"

"Oh!"

I said "You know about--"

"With all due respect to master,"

Conseil replied, "the Nautilus's commander has invited us, together with master, for a visit tomorrow to Ceylon's magnificent pearl fisheries.

He did so in the most cordial terms and conducted himself like a true gentleman."

"He didn't tell you anything else?"

"Nothing, sir,"

the Canadian replied.

"He said you'd already discussed this little stroll."

"Indeed,"

I said.

"But didn't he give you any details on--"

"Not a one, Mr.

Naturalist.

You will be going with us, right?"

"Me?

Why yes, certainly, of course!

I can see that you like the idea, Mr.

Land."

"Yes!

It will be a really unusual experience!"

"And possibly dangerous!"

I added in an insinuating tone.

"Dangerous?"

Ned Land replied.

"A simple trip to an oysterbank?"

Assuredly, Captain Nemo hadn't seen fit to plant the idea of sharks in the minds of my companions.

For my part, I stared at them with anxious eyes, as if they were already missing a limb or two.

Should I alert them?

Yes, surely, but I hardly knew how to go about it.

"Would master,"

Conseil said to me, "give us some background on pearl fishing?"

"On the fishing itself?"

I asked.

"Or on the occupational hazards that--"

"On the fishing,"

the Canadian replied.

"Before we tackle the terrain, it helps to be familiar with it."

"All right, sit down, my friends, and I'll teach you everything I myself have just been taught by the Englishman H.

C.

Sirr!"

Ned and Conseil took seats on a couch, and right off the Canadian said to me: "Sir, just what is a pearl exactly?"

"My gallant Ned,"

I replied, "for poets a pearl is a tear from the sea; for Orientals it's a drop of solidified dew; for the ladies it's a jewel they can wear on their fingers, necks, and ears that's oblong in shape, glassy in luster, and formed from mother-of-pearl; for chemists it's a mixture of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate with a little gelatin protein; and finally, for naturalists it's a simple festering secretion from the organ that produces mother-of-pearl in certain bivalves."

"Branch Mollusca,"

Conseil said, "class Acephala, order Testacea."

"Correct, my scholarly Conseil.

Now then, those Testacea capable of producing pearls include rainbow abalone, turbo snails, giant clams, and saltwater scallops--briefly, all those that secrete mother-of-pearl, in other words, that blue, azure, violet, or white substance lining the insides of their valves."

"Are mussels included too?"

the Canadian asked.

"Yes!

The mussels of certain streams in Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Saxony, Bohemia, and France."

"Good!"

the Canadian replied.

"From now on we'll pay closer attention to 'em."

"But,"

I went on, "for secreting pearls, the ideal mollusk is the pearl oyster Meleagrina margaritifera, that valuable shellfish.

Pearls result simply from mother-of-pearl solidifying into a globular shape.

Either they stick to the oyster's shell, or they become embedded in the creature's folds.

On the valves a pearl sticks fast; on the flesh it lies loose.

But its nucleus is always some small, hard object, say a sterile egg or a grain of sand, around which the mother-of-pearl is deposited in thin, concentric layers over several years in succession."

"Can one find several pearls in the same oyster?"

Conseil asked.

"Yes, my boy.

There are some shellfish that turn into real jewel coffers.

They even mention one oyster, about which I remain dubious, that supposedly contained at least 150 sharks."

"150 sharks!"

Ned Land yelped.

"Did I say sharks?"

I exclaimed hastily.

"I meant 150 pearls.

Sharks wouldn't make sense."

"Indeed,"

Conseil said.

"But will master now tell us how one goes about extracting these pearls?"

"One proceeds in several ways, and often when pearls stick to the valves, fishermen even pull them loose with pliers.

But usually the shellfish are spread out on mats made from the esparto grass that covers the beaches.

Thus they die in the open air, and by the end of ten days they've rotted sufficiently.

Next they're immersed in huge tanks of salt water, then they're opened up and washed.

At this point the sorters begin their twofold task.

First they remove the layers of mother-of-pearl, which are known in the industry by the names legitimate silver, bastard white, or bastard black, and these are shipped out in cases weighing 125 to 150 kilograms.

Then they remove the oyster's meaty tissue, boil it, and finally strain it, in order to extract even the smallest pearls."

"Do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size?"

Conseil asked.

"Not only on their size,"

I replied, "but also according to their shape, their water--in other words, their color--and their orient-- in other words, that dappled, shimmering glow that makes them so delightful to the eye.

The finest pearls are called virgin pearls, or paragons; they form in isolation within the mollusk's tissue.

They're white, often opaque but sometimes of opalescent transparency, and usually spherical or pear-shaped.

The spherical ones are made into bracelets; the pear-shaped ones into earrings, and since they're the most valuable, they're priced individually.

The other pearls that stick to the oyster's shell are more erratically shaped and are priced by weight.

Finally, classed in the lowest order, the smallest pearls are known by the name seed pearls; they're priced by the measuring cup and are used mainly in the creation of embroidery for church vestments."

"But it must be a long, hard job, sorting out these pearls by size,"

the Canadian said.

"No, my friend.

That task is performed with eleven strainers, or sieves, that are pierced with different numbers of holes.

Those pearls staying in the strainers with twenty to eighty holes are in the first order.

Those not slipping through the sieves pierced with 100 to 800 holes are in the second order.

Finally, those pearls for which one uses strainers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make up the seed pearls."

"How ingenious,"

Conseil said, "to reduce dividing and classifying pearls to a mechanical operation.

And could master tell us the profits brought in by harvesting these banks of pearl oysters?"

"According to Sirr's book,"

I replied, "these Ceylon fisheries are farmed annually for a total profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters."

"Francs!"

Conseil rebuked.

"Yes, francs!

3,000,000 francs!"

I went on.

"But I don't think these fisheries bring in the returns they once did.

Similarly, the Central American fisheries used to make an annual profit of 4,000,000 francs during the reign of King Charles V, but now they bring in only two-thirds of that amount.

All in all, it's estimated that 9,000,000 francs is the current yearly return for the whole pearl-harvesting industry."

"But,"

Conseil asked, "haven't certain famous pearls been quoted at extremely high prices?"

"Yes, my boy.

They say Julius Caesar gave Servilia a pearl worth 120,000 francs in our currency."

"I've even heard stories,"

the Canadian said, "about some lady in ancient times who drank pearls in vinegar."

"Cleopatra,"

Conseil shot back.

"It must have tasted pretty bad,"

Ned Land added.

"Abominable, Ned my friend,"

Conseil replied.

"But when a little glass of vinegar is worth 1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small price to pay."

"I'm sorry I didn't marry the gal,"

the Canadian said, throwing up his hands with an air of discouragement.

"Ned Land married to Cleopatra?"

Conseil exclaimed.

"But I was all set to tie the knot, Conseil,"

the Canadian replied in all seriousness, "and it wasn't my fault the whole business fell through.

I even bought a pearl necklace for my fiance, Kate Tender, but she married somebody else instead.

Well, that necklace cost me only $1.50, but you can absolutely trust me on this, professor, its pearls were so big, they wouldn't have gone through that strainer with twenty holes."

"My gallant Ned,"

I replied, laughing, "those were artificial pearls, ordinary glass beads whose insides were coated with Essence of Orient."

"Wow!"

the Canadian replied.

"That Essence of Orient must sell for quite a large sum."

"As little as zero!

It comes from the scales of a European carp, it's nothing more than a silver substance that collects in the water and is preserved in ammonia.

It's worthless."

"Maybe that's why Kate Tender married somebody else,"

replied Mr.

Land philosophically.

"But,"

I said, "getting back to pearls of great value, I don't think any sovereign ever possessed one superior to the pearl owned by Captain Nemo."

"This one?"

Conseil said, pointing to a magnificent jewel in its glass case.

"Exactly.

And I'm certainly not far off when I estimate its value at 2,000,000 .

.

.

uh .

.

."

"Francs!"

Conseil said quickly.

"Yes,"

I said, "2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our captain was the effort to pick it up."

"Ha!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

"During our stroll tomorrow, who says we won't run into one just like it?"

"Bah!"

Conseil put in.

"And why not?"

"What good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the Nautilus?"

"Here, no,"

Ned Land said.

"But elsewhere.

.

.

."

"Oh!

Elsewhere!"

Conseil put in, shaking his head.

"In fact,"

I said, "Mr.

Land is right.

And if we ever brought back to Europe or America a pearl worth millions, it would make the story of our adventures more authentic--and much more rewarding."

"That's how I see it,"

the Canadian said.

"But,"

said Conseil, who perpetually returned to the didactic side of things, "is this pearl fishing ever dangerous?"

"No,"

I replied quickly, "especially if one takes certain precautions."

"What risks would you run in a job like that?"

Ned Land said.

"Swallowing a few gulps of salt water?"

"Whatever you say, Ned."

Then, trying to imitate Captain Nemo's carefree tone, I asked, "By the way, gallant Ned, are you afraid of sharks?"

"Me?"

the Canadian replied.

"I'm a professional harpooner!

It's my job to make a mockery of them!"

"It isn't an issue,"

I said, "of fishing for them with a swivel hook, hoisting them onto the deck of a ship, chopping off the tail with a sweep of the ax, opening the belly, ripping out the heart, and tossing it into the sea."

"So it's an issue of .

.

.

?"

"Yes, precisely."

"In the water?"

"In the water."

"Ye gods, just give me a good harpoon!

You see, sir, these sharks are badly designed.

They have to roll their bellies over to snap you up, and in the meantime .

.

."

Ned Land had a way of pronouncing the word "snap"

that sent chills down the spine.

"Well, how about you, Conseil?

What are your feelings about these man-eaters?"

"Me?"

Conseil said.

"I'm afraid I must be frank with master."

Good for you, I thought.

"If master faces these sharks,"

Conseil said, "I think his loyal manservant should face them with him!"

A Pearl Worth Ten Million NIGHT FELL.

I went to bed.

I slept pretty poorly.

Man-eaters played a major role in my dreams.

And I found it more or less appropriate that the French word for shark, requin, has its linguistic roots in the word requiem.

The next day at four o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by the steward whom Captain Nemo had placed expressly at my service.

I got up quickly, dressed, and went into the lounge.

Captain Nemo was waiting for me.

"Professor Aronnax,"

he said to me, "are you ready to start?"

"I'm ready."

"Kindly follow me."

"What about my companions, captain?"

"They've been alerted and are waiting for us."

"Aren't we going to put on our diving suits?"

I asked.

"Not yet.

I haven't let the Nautilus pull too near the coast, and we're fairly well out from the Mannar oysterbank.

But I have the skiff ready, and it will take us to the exact spot where we'll disembark, which will save us a pretty long trek.

It's carrying our diving equipment, and we'll suit up just before we begin our underwater exploring."

Captain Nemo took me to the central companionway whose steps led to the platform.

Ned and Conseil were there, enraptured with the "pleasure trip"

getting under way.

Oars in position, five of the Nautilus's sailors were waiting for us aboard the skiff, which was moored alongside.

The night was still dark.

Layers of clouds cloaked the sky and left only a few stars in view.

My eyes flew to the side where land lay, but I saw only a blurred line covering three-quarters of the horizon from southwest to northwest.

Going up Ceylon's west coast during the night, the Nautilus lay west of the bay, or rather that gulf formed by the mainland and Mannar Island.

Under these dark waters there stretched the bank of shellfish, an inexhaustible field of pearls more than twenty miles long.

Captain Nemo, Conseil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern of the skiff.

The longboat's coxswain took the tiller; his four companions leaned into their oars; the moorings were cast off and we pulled clear.

The skiff headed southward.

The oarsmen took their time.

I watched their strokes vigorously catch the water, and they always waited ten seconds before rowing again, following the practice used in most navies.

While the longboat coasted, drops of liquid flicked from the oars and hit the dark troughs of the waves, pitter-pattering like splashes of molten lead.

Coming from well out, a mild swell made the skiff roll gently, and a few cresting billows lapped at its bow.

We were silent.

What was Captain Nemo thinking?

Perhaps that this approaching shore was too close for comfort, contrary to the Canadian's views in which it still seemed too far away.

As for Conseil, he had come along out of simple curiosity.

Near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined the upper lines of the coast with greater distinctness.

Fairly flat to the east, it swelled a little toward the south.

Five miles still separated it from us, and its beach merged with the misty waters.

Between us and the shore, the sea was deserted.

Not a boat, not a diver.

Profound solitude reigned over this gathering place of pearl fishermen.

As Captain Nemo had commented, we were arriving in these waterways a month too soon.

At six o'clock the day broke suddenly, with that speed unique to tropical regions, which experience no real dawn or dusk.

The sun's rays pierced the cloud curtain gathered on the easterly horizon, and the radiant orb rose swiftly.

I could clearly see the shore, which featured a few sparse trees here and there.

The skiff advanced toward Mannar Island, which curved to the south.

Captain Nemo stood up from his thwart and studied the sea.

At his signal the anchor was lowered, but its chain barely ran because the bottom lay no more than a meter down, and this locality was one of the shallowest spots near the bank of shellfish.

Instantly the skiff wheeled around under the ebb tide's outbound thrust.

"Here we are, Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo then said.

"You observe this confined bay?

A month from now in this very place, the numerous fishing boats of the harvesters will gather, and these are the waters their divers will ransack so daringly.

This bay is felicitously laid out for their type of fishing.

It's sheltered from the strongest winds, and the sea is never very turbulent here, highly favorable conditions for diving work.

Now let's put on our underwater suits, and we'll begin our stroll."

I didn't reply, and while staring at these suspicious waves, I began to put on my heavy aquatic clothes, helped by the longboat's sailors.

Captain Nemo and my two companions suited up as well.

None of the Nautilus's men were to go with us on this new excursion.

Soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india-rubber clothing, and straps fastened the air devices onto our backs.

As for the Ruhmkorff device, it didn't seem to be in the picture.

Before inserting my head into its copper capsule, I commented on this to the captain.

"Our lighting equipment would be useless to us,"

the captain answered me.

"We won't be going very deep, and the sun's rays will be sufficient to light our way.

Besides, it's unwise to carry electric lanterns under these waves.

Their brightness might unexpectedly attract certain dangerous occupants of these waterways."

As Captain Nemo pronounced these words, I turned to Conseil and Ned Land.

But my two friends had already encased their craniums in their metal headgear, and they could neither hear nor reply.

I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.

"What about our weapons?"

I asked him.

"Our rifles?"

"Rifles!

What for?

Don't your mountaineers attack bears dagger in hand?

And isn't steel surer than lead?

Here's a sturdy blade.

Slip it under your belt and let's be off."

I stared at my companions.

They were armed in the same fashion, and Ned Land was also brandishing an enormous harpoon he had stowed in the skiff before leaving the Nautilus.

Then, following the captain's example, I let myself be crowned with my heavy copper sphere, and our air tanks immediately went into action.

An instant later, the longboat's sailors helped us overboard one after the other, and we set foot on level sand in a meter and a half of water.

Captain Nemo gave us a hand signal.

We followed him down a gentle slope and disappeared under the waves.

There the obsessive fears in my brain left me.

I became surprisingly calm again.

The ease with which I could move increased my confidence, and the many strange sights captivated my imagination.

The sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves.

The tiniest objects remained visible.

After ten minutes of walking, we were in five meters of water, and the terrain had become almost flat.

Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose underfoot schools of unusual fish from the genus Monopterus, whose members have no fin but their tail.

I recognized the Javanese eel, a genuine eight-decimeter serpent with a bluish gray belly, which, without the gold lines over its flanks, could easily be confused with the conger eel.

From the butterfish genus, whose oval bodies are very flat, I observed several adorned in brilliant colors and sporting a dorsal fin like a sickle, edible fish that, when dried and marinated, make an excellent dish known by the name "karawade"; then some sea poachers, fish belonging to the genus Aspidophoroides, whose bodies are covered with scaly armor divided into eight lengthwise sections.

Meanwhile, as the sun got progressively higher, it lit up the watery mass more and more.

The seafloor changed little by little.

Its fine-grained sand was followed by a genuine causeway of smooth crags covered by a carpet of mollusks and zoophytes.

Among other specimens in these two branches, I noted some windowpane oysters with thin valves of unequal size, a type of ostracod unique to the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, then orange-hued lucina with circular shells, awl-shaped auger shells, some of those Persian murex snails that supply the Nautilus with such wonderful dye, spiky periwinkles fifteen centimeters long that rose under the waves like hands ready to grab you, turban snails with shells made of horn and bristling all over with spines, lamp shells, edible duck clams that feed the Hindu marketplace, subtly luminous jellyfish of the species Pelagia panopyra, and finally some wonderful Oculina flabelliforma, magnificent sea fans that fashion one of the most luxuriant tree forms in this ocean.

In the midst of this moving vegetation, under arbors of water plants, there raced legions of clumsy articulates, in particular some fanged frog crabs whose carapaces form a slightly rounded triangle, robber crabs exclusive to these waterways, and horrible parthenope crabs whose appearance was repulsive to the eye.

One animal no less hideous, which I encountered several times, was the enormous crab that Mr.

Darwin observed, to which nature has given the instinct and requisite strength to eat coconuts; it scrambles up trees on the beach and sends the coconuts tumbling; they fracture in their fall and are opened by its powerful pincers.

Here, under these clear waves, this crab raced around with matchless agility, while green turtles from the species frequenting the Malabar coast moved sluggishly among the crumbling rocks.

Near seven o'clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish, where pearl oysters reproduce by the millions.

These valuable mollusks stick to rocks, where they're strongly attached by a mass of brown filaments that forbids their moving about.

In this respect oysters are inferior even to mussels, to whom nature has not denied all talent for locomotion.

The shellfish Meleagrina, that womb for pearls whose valves are nearly equal in size, has the shape of a round shell with thick walls and a very rough exterior.

Some of these shells were furrowed with flaky, greenish bands that radiated down from the top.

These were the young oysters.

The others had rugged black surfaces, measured up to fifteen centimeters in width, and were ten or more years old.

Captain Nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish, and I saw that these mines were genuinely inexhaustible, since nature's creative powers are greater than man's destructive instincts.

True to those instincts, Ned Land greedily stuffed the finest of these mollusks into a net he carried at his side.

But we couldn't stop.

We had to follow the captain, who headed down trails seemingly known only to himself.

The seafloor rose noticeably, and when I lifted my arms, sometimes they would pass above the surface of the sea.

Then the level of the oysterbank would lower unpredictably.

Often we went around tall, pointed rocks rising like pyramids.

In their dark crevices huge crustaceans, aiming their long legs like heavy artillery, watched us with unblinking eyes, while underfoot there crept millipedes, bloodworms, aricia worms, and annelid worms, whose antennas and tubular tentacles were incredibly long.

Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hollowed from a picturesque pile of rocks whose smooth heights were completely hung with underwater flora.

At first this cave looked pitch-black to me.

Inside, the sun's rays seemed to diminish by degrees.

Their hazy transparency was nothing more than drowned light.

Captain Nemo went in.

We followed him.

My eyes soon grew accustomed to this comparative gloom.

I distinguished the unpredictably contoured springings of a vault, supported by natural pillars firmly based on a granite foundation, like the weighty columns of Tuscan architecture.

Why had our incomprehensible guide taken us into the depths of this underwater crypt?

I would soon find out.

After going down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor of a sort of circular pit.

There Captain Nemo stopped, and his hand indicated an object that I hadn't yet noticed.

It was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a titanic giant clam, a holy-water font that could have held a whole lake, a basin more than two meters wide, hence even bigger than the one adorning the Nautilus's lounge.

I approached this phenomenal mollusk.

Its mass of filaments attached it to a table of granite, and there it grew by itself in the midst of the cave's calm waters.

I estimated the weight of this giant clam at 300 kilograms.

Hence such an oyster held fifteen kilos of meat, and you'd need the stomach of King Gargantua to eat a couple dozen.

Captain Nemo was obviously familiar with this bivalve's existence.

This wasn't the first time he'd paid it a visit, and I thought his sole reason for leading us to this locality was to show us a natural curiosity.

I was mistaken.

Captain Nemo had an explicit personal interest in checking on the current condition of this giant clam.

The mollusk's two valves were partly open.

The captain approached and stuck his dagger vertically between the shells to discourage any ideas about closing; then with his hands he raised the fringed, membrane-filled tunic that made up the animal's mantle.

There, between its leaflike folds, I saw a loose pearl as big as a coconut.

Its globular shape, perfect clarity, and wonderful orient made it a jewel of incalculable value.

Carried away by curiosity, I stretched out my hand to take it, weigh it, fondle it!

But the captain stopped me, signaled no, removed his dagger in one swift motion, and let the two valves snap shut.

I then understood Captain Nemo's intent.

By leaving the pearl buried beneath the giant clam's mantle, he allowed it to grow imperceptibly.

With each passing year the mollusk's secretions added new concentric layers.

The captain alone was familiar with the cave where this wonderful fruit of nature was "ripening"; he alone reared it, so to speak, in order to transfer it one day to his dearly beloved museum.

Perhaps, following the examples of oyster farmers in China and India, he had even predetermined the creation of this pearl by sticking under the mollusk's folds some piece of glass or metal that was gradually covered with mother-of-pearl.

In any case, comparing this pearl to others I already knew about, and to those shimmering in the captain's collection, I estimated that it was worth at least 10,000,000 francs.

It was a superb natural curiosity rather than a luxurious piece of jewelry, because I don't know of any female ear that could handle it.

Our visit to this opulent giant clam came to an end.

Captain Nemo left the cave, and we climbed back up the bank of shellfish in the midst of these clear waters not yet disturbed by divers at work.

We walked by ourselves, genuine loiterers stopping or straying as our fancies dictated.

For my part, I was no longer worried about those dangers my imagination had so ridiculously exaggerated.

The shallows drew noticeably closer to the surface of the sea, and soon, walking in only a meter of water, my head passed well above the level of the ocean.

Conseil rejoined me, and gluing his huge copper capsule to mine, his eyes gave me a friendly greeting.

But this lofty plateau measured only a few fathoms, and soon we reentered Our Element.

I think I've now earned the right to dub it that.

Ten minutes later, Captain Nemo stopped suddenly.

I thought he'd called a halt so that we could turn and start back.

No.

With a gesture he ordered us to crouch beside him at the foot of a wide crevice.

His hand motioned toward a spot within the liquid mass, and I looked carefully.

Five meters away a shadow appeared and dropped to the seafloor.

The alarming idea of sharks crossed my mind.

But I was mistaken, and once again we didn't have to deal with monsters of the deep.

It was a man, a living man, a black Indian fisherman, a poor devil who no doubt had come to gather what he could before harvest time.

I saw the bottom of his dinghy, moored a few feet above his head.

He would dive and go back up in quick succession.

A stone cut in the shape of a sugar loaf, which he gripped between his feet while a rope connected it to his boat, served to lower him more quickly to the ocean floor.

This was the extent of his equipment.

Arriving on the seafloor at a depth of about five meters, he fell to his knees and stuffed his sack with shellfish gathered at random.

Then he went back up, emptied his sack, pulled up his stone, and started all over again, the whole process lasting only thirty seconds.

This diver didn't see us.

A shadow cast by our crag hid us from his view.

And besides, how could this poor Indian ever have guessed that human beings, creatures like himself, were near him under the waters, eavesdropping on his movements, not missing a single detail of his fishing!

So he went up and down several times.

He gathered only about ten shellfish per dive, because he had to tear them from the banks where each clung with its tough mass of filaments.

And how many of these oysters for which he risked his life would have no pearl in them!

I observed him with great care.

His movements were systematically executed, and for half an hour no danger seemed to threaten him.

So I had gotten used to the sight of this fascinating fishing when all at once, just as the Indian was kneeling on the seafloor, I saw him make a frightened gesture, stand, and gather himself to spring back to the surface of the waves.

I understood his fear.

A gigantic shadow appeared above the poor diver.

It was a shark of huge size, moving in diagonally, eyes ablaze, jaws wide open!

I was speechless with horror, unable to make a single movement.

With one vigorous stroke of its fins, the voracious animal shot toward the Indian, who jumped aside and avoided the shark's bite but not the thrashing of its tail, because that tail struck him across the chest and stretched him out on the seafloor.

This scene lasted barely a few seconds.

The shark returned, rolled over on its back, and was getting ready to cut the Indian in half, when Captain Nemo, who was stationed beside me, suddenly stood up.

Then he strode right toward the monster, dagger in hand, ready to fight it at close quarters.

Just as it was about to snap up the poor fisherman, the man-eater saw its new adversary, repositioned itself on its belly, and headed swiftly toward him.

I can see Captain Nemo's bearing to this day.

Bracing himself, he waited for the fearsome man-eater with wonderful composure, and when the latter rushed at him, the captain leaped aside with prodigious quickness, avoided a collision, and sank his dagger into its belly.

But that wasn't the end of the story.

A dreadful battle was joined.

The shark bellowed, so to speak.

Blood was pouring into the waves from its wounds.

The sea was dyed red, and through this opaque liquid I could see nothing else.

Nothing else until the moment when, through a rift in the clouds, I saw the daring captain clinging to one of the animal's fins, fighting the monster at close quarters, belaboring his enemy's belly with stabs of the dagger yet unable to deliver the deciding thrust, in other words, a direct hit to the heart.

In its struggles the man-eater churned the watery mass so furiously, its eddies threatened to knock me over.

I wanted to run to the captain's rescue.

But I was transfixed with horror, unable to move.

I stared, wild-eyed.

I saw the fight enter a new phase.

The captain fell to the seafloor, toppled by the enormous mass weighing him down.

Then the shark's jaws opened astoundingly wide, like a pair of industrial shears, and that would have been the finish of Captain Nemo had not Ned Land, quick as thought, rushed forward with his harpoon and driven its dreadful point into the shark's underside.

The waves were saturated with masses of blood.

The waters shook with the movements of the man-eater, which thrashed about with indescribable fury.

Ned Land hadn't missed his target.

This was the monster's death rattle.

Pierced to the heart, it was struggling with dreadful spasms whose aftershocks knocked Conseil off his feet.

Meanwhile Ned Land pulled the captain clear.

Uninjured, the latter stood up, went right to the Indian, quickly cut the rope binding the man to his stone, took the fellow in his arms, and with a vigorous kick of the heel, rose to the surface of the sea.

The three of us followed him, and a few moments later, miraculously safe, we reached the fisherman's longboat.

Captain Nemo's first concern was to revive this unfortunate man.

I wasn't sure he would succeed.

I hoped so, since the poor devil hadn't been under very long.

But that stroke from the shark's tail could have been his deathblow.

Fortunately, after vigorous massaging by Conseil and the captain, I saw the nearly drowned man regain consciousness little by little.

He opened his eyes.

How startled he must have felt, how frightened even, at seeing four huge, copper craniums leaning over him!

And above all, what must he have thought when Captain Nemo pulled a bag of pearls from a pocket in his diving suit and placed it in the fisherman's hands?

This magnificent benefaction from the Man of the Waters to the poor Indian from Ceylon was accepted by the latter with trembling hands.

His bewildered eyes indicated that he didn't know to what superhuman creatures he owed both his life and his fortune.

At the captain's signal we returned to the bank of shellfish, and retracing our steps, we walked for half an hour until we encountered the anchor connecting the seafloor with the Nautilus's skiff.

Back on board, the sailors helped divest us of our heavy copper carapaces.

Captain Nemo's first words were spoken to the Canadian.

"Thank you, Mr.

Land,"

he told him.

"Tit for tat, captain,"

Ned Land replied.

"I owed it to you."

The ghost of a smile glided across the captain's lips, and that was all.

"To the Nautilus,"

he said.

The longboat flew over the waves.

A few minutes later we encountered the shark's corpse again, floating.

From the black markings on the tips of its fins, I recognized the dreadful Squalus melanopterus from the seas of the East Indies, a variety in the species of sharks proper.

It was more than twenty-five feet long; its enormous mouth occupied a third of its body.

It was an adult, as could be seen from the six rows of teeth forming an isosceles triangle in its upper jaw.

Conseil looked at it with purely scientific fascination, and I'm sure he placed it, not without good reason, in the class of cartilaginous fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills, family Selacia, genus Squalus.

While I was contemplating this inert mass, suddenly a dozen of these voracious melanoptera appeared around our longboat; but, paying no attention to us, they pounced on the corpse and quarreled over every scrap of it.

By 8:30 we were back on board the Nautilus.

There I fell to thinking about the incidents that marked our excursion over the Mannar oysterbank.

Two impressions inevitably stood out.

One concerned Captain Nemo's matchless bravery, the other his devotion to a human being, a representative of that race from which he had fled beneath the seas.

In spite of everything, this strange man hadn't yet succeeded in completely stifling his heart.

When I shared these impressions with him, he answered me in a tone touched with emotion: "That Indian, professor, lives in the land of the oppressed, and I am to this day, and will be until my last breath, a native of that same land!"

The Red Sea DURING THE DAY of January 29, the island of Ceylon disappeared below the horizon, and at a speed of twenty miles per hour, the Nautilus glided into the labyrinthine channels that separate the Maldive and Laccadive Islands.

It likewise hugged Kiltan Island, a shore of madreporic origin discovered by Vasco da Gama in 1499 and one of nineteen chief islands in the island group of the Laccadives, located between latitude 10 degrees and 14 degrees 30' north, and between longitude 50 degrees 72' and 69 degrees east.

By then we had fared 16,220 miles, or 7,500 leagues, from our starting point in the seas of Japan.

The next day, January 30, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of the ocean, there was no more land in sight.

Setting its course to the north-northwest, the ship headed toward the Gulf of Oman, carved out between Arabia and the Indian peninsula and providing access to the Persian Gulf.

This was obviously a blind alley with no possible outlet.

So where was Captain Nemo taking us?

I was unable to say.

Which didn't satisfy the Canadian, who that day asked me where we were going.

"We're going, Mr.

Ned, where the captain's fancy takes us."

"His fancy,"

the Canadian replied, "won't take us very far.

The Persian Gulf has no outlet, and if we enter those waters, it won't be long before we return in our tracks."

"All right, we'll return, Mr.

Land, and after the Persian Gulf, if the Nautilus wants to visit the Red Sea, the Strait of Bab el Mandeb is still there to let us in!"

"I don't have to tell you, sir,"

Ned Land replied, "that the Red Sea is just as landlocked as the gulf, since the Isthmus of Suez hasn't been cut all the way through yet; and even if it was, a boat as secretive as ours wouldn't risk a canal intersected with locks.

So the Red Sea won't be our way back to Europe either."

"But I didn't say we'd return to Europe."

"What do you figure, then?"

"I figure that after visiting these unusual waterways of Arabia and Egypt, the Nautilus will go back down to the Indian Ocean, perhaps through Mozambique Channel, perhaps off the Mascarene Islands, and then make for the Cape of Good Hope."

"And once we're at the Cape of Good Hope?"

the Canadian asked with typical persistence.

"Well then, we'll enter that Atlantic Ocean with which we aren't yet familiar.

What's wrong, Ned my friend?

Are you tired of this voyage under the seas?

Are you bored with the constantly changing sight of these underwater wonders?

Speaking for myself, I'll be extremely distressed to see the end of a voyage so few men will ever have a chance to make."

"But don't you realize, Professor Aronnax,"

the Canadian replied, "that soon we'll have been imprisoned for three whole months aboard this Nautilus?"

"No, Ned, I didn't realize it, I don't want to realize it, and I don't keep track of every day and every hour."

"But when will it be over?"

"In its appointed time.

Meanwhile there's nothing we can do about it, and our discussions are futile.

My gallant Ned, if you come and tell me, 'A chance to escape is available to us,' then I'll discuss it with you.

But that isn't the case, and in all honesty, I don't think Captain Nemo ever ventures into European seas."

This short dialogue reveals that in my mania for the Nautilus, I was turning into the spitting image of its commander.

As for Ned Land, he ended our talk in his best speechifying style: "That's all fine and dandy.

But in my humble opinion, a life in jail is a life without joy."

For four days until February 3, the Nautilus inspected the Gulf of Oman at various speeds and depths.

It seemed to be traveling at random, as if hesitating over which course to follow, but it never crossed the Tropic of Cancer.

After leaving this gulf we raised Muscat for an instant, the most important town in the country of Oman.

I marveled at its strange appearance in the midst of the black rocks surrounding it, against which the white of its houses and forts stood out sharply.

I spotted the rounded domes of its mosques, the elegant tips of its minarets, and its fresh, leafy terraces.

But it was only a fleeting vision, and the Nautilus soon sank beneath the dark waves of these waterways.

Then our ship went along at a distance of six miles from the Arabic coasts of Mahra and Hadhramaut, their undulating lines of mountains relieved by a few ancient ruins.

On February 5 we finally put into the Gulf of Aden, a genuine funnel stuck into the neck of Bab el Mandeb and bottling these Indian waters in the Red Sea.

On February 6 the Nautilus cruised in sight of the city of Aden, perched on a promontory connected to the continent by a narrow isthmus, a sort of inaccessible Gibraltar whose fortifications the English rebuilt after capturing it in 1839.

I glimpsed the octagonal minarets of this town, which used to be one of the wealthiest, busiest commercial centers along this coast, as the Arab historian Idrisi tells it.

I was convinced that when Captain Nemo reached this point, he would back out again; but I was mistaken, and much to my surprise, he did nothing of the sort.

The next day, February 7, we entered the Strait of Bab el Mandeb, whose name means "Gate of Tears"

in the Arabic language.

Twenty miles wide, it's only fifty-two kilometers long, and with the Nautilus launched at full speed, clearing it was the work of barely an hour.

But I didn't see a thing, not even Perim Island where the British government built fortifications to strengthen Aden's position.

There were many English and French steamers plowing this narrow passageway, liners going from Suez to Bombay, Calcutta, Melbourne, Runion Island, and Mauritius; far too much traffic for the Nautilus to make an appearance on the surface.

So it wisely stayed in midwater.

Finally, at noon, we were plowing the waves of the Red Sea.

The Red Sea: that great lake so famous in biblical traditions, seldom replenished by rains, fed by no important rivers, continually drained by a high rate of evaporation, its water level dropping a meter and a half every year!

If it were fully landlocked like a lake, this odd gulf might dry up completely; on this score it's inferior to its neighbors, the Caspian Sea and the Dead Sea, whose levels lower only to the point where their evaporation exactly equals the amounts of water they take to their hearts.

This Red Sea is 2,600 kilometers long with an average width of 240.

In the days of the Ptolemies and the Roman emperors, it was a great commercial artery for the world, and when its isthmus has been cut through, it will completely regain that bygone importance that the Suez railways have already brought back in part.

I would not even attempt to understand the whim that induced Captain Nemo to take us into this gulf.

But I wholeheartedly approved of the Nautilus's entering it.

It adopted a medium pace, sometimes staying on the surface, sometimes diving to avoid some ship, and so I could observe both the inside and topside of this highly unusual sea.

On February 8, as early as the first hours of daylight, Mocha appeared before us: a town now in ruins, whose walls would collapse at the mere sound of a cannon, and which shelters a few leafy date trees here and there.

This once-important city used to contain six public marketplaces plus twenty-six mosques, and its walls, protected by fourteen forts, fashioned a three-kilometer girdle around it.

Then the Nautilus drew near the beaches of Africa, where the sea is considerably deeper.

There, through the open panels and in a midwater of crystal clarity, our ship enabled us to study wonderful bushes of shining coral and huge chunks of rock wrapped in splendid green furs of algae and fucus.

What an indescribable sight, and what a variety of settings and scenery where these reefs and volcanic islands leveled off by the Libyan coast!

But soon the Nautilus hugged the eastern shore where these tree forms appeared in all their glory.

This was off the coast of Tihama, and there such zoophyte displays not only flourished below sea level but they also fashioned picturesque networks that unreeled as high as ten fathoms above it; the latter were more whimsical but less colorful than the former, which kept their bloom thanks to the moist vitality of the waters.

How many delightful hours I spent in this way at the lounge window!

How many new specimens of underwater flora and fauna I marveled at beneath the light of our electric beacon!

Mushroom-shaped fungus coral, some slate-colored sea anemone including the species Thalassianthus aster among others, organ-pipe coral arranged like flutes and just begging for a puff from the god Pan, shells unique to this sea that dwell in madreporic cavities and whose bases are twisted into squat spirals, and finally a thousand samples of a polypary I hadn't observed until then: the common sponge.

First division in the polyp group, the class Spongiaria has been created by scientists precisely for this unusual exhibit whose usefulness is beyond dispute.

The sponge is definitely not a plant, as some naturalists still believe, but an animal of the lowest order, a polypary inferior even to coral.

Its animal nature isn't in doubt, and we can't accept even the views of the ancients, who regarded it as halfway between plant and animal.

But I must say that naturalists are not in agreement on the structural mode of sponges.

For some it's a polypary, and for others, such as Professor Milne-Edwards, it's a single, solitary individual.

The class Spongiaria contains about 300 species that are encountered in a large number of seas and even in certain streams, where they've been given the name freshwater sponges.

But their waters of choice are the Red Sea and the Mediterranean near the Greek Islands or the coast of Syria.

These waters witness the reproduction and growth of soft, delicate bath sponges whose prices run as high as 150 francs apiece: the yellow sponge from Syria, the horn sponge from Barbary, etc.

But since I had no hope of studying these zoophytes in the seaports of the Levant, from which we were separated by the insuperable Isthmus of Suez, I had to be content with observing them in the waters of the Red Sea.

So I called Conseil to my side, while at an average depth of eight to nine meters, the Nautilus slowly skimmed every beautiful rock on the easterly coast.

There sponges grew in every shape, globular, stalklike, leaflike, fingerlike.

With reasonable accuracy, they lived up to their nicknames of basket sponges, chalice sponges, distaff sponges, elkhorn sponges, lion's paws, peacock's tails, and Neptune's gloves-- designations bestowed on them by fishermen, more poetically inclined than scientists.

A gelatinous, semifluid substance coated the fibrous tissue of these sponges, and from this tissue there escaped a steady trickle of water that, after carrying sustenance to each cell, was being expelled by a contracting movement.

This jellylike substance disappears when the polyp dies, emitting ammonia as it rots.

Finally nothing remains but the fibers, either gelatinous or made of horn, that constitute your household sponge, which takes on a russet hue and is used for various tasks depending on its degree of elasticity, permeability, or resistance to saturation.

These polyparies were sticking to rocks, shells of mollusks, and even the stalks of water plants.

They adorned the smallest crevices, some sprawling, others standing or hanging like coral outgrowths.

I told Conseil that sponges are fished up in two ways, either by dragnet or by hand.

The latter method calls for the services of a diver, but it's preferable because it spares the polypary's tissue, leaving it with a much higher market value.

Other zoophytes swarming near the sponges consisted chiefly of a very elegant species of jellyfish; mollusks were represented by varieties of squid that, according to Professor Orbigny, are unique to the Red Sea; and reptiles by virgata turtles belonging to the genus Chelonia, which furnished our table with a dainty but wholesome dish.

As for fish, they were numerous and often remarkable.

Here are the ones that the Nautilus's nets most frequently hauled on board: rays, including spotted rays that were oval in shape and brick red in color, their bodies strewn with erratic blue speckles and identifiable by their jagged double stings, silver-backed skates, common stingrays with stippled tails, butterfly rays that looked like huge two-meter cloaks flapping at middepth, toothless guitarfish that were a type of cartilaginous fish closer to the shark, trunkfish known as dromedaries that were one and a half feet long and had humps ending in backward-curving stings, serpentine moray eels with silver tails and bluish backs plus brown pectorals trimmed in gray piping, a species of butterfish called the fiatola decked out in thin gold stripes and the three colors of the French flag, Montague blennies four decimeters long, superb jacks handsomely embellished by seven black crosswise streaks with blue and yellow fins plus gold and silver scales, snooks, standard mullet with yellow heads, parrotfish, wrasse, triggerfish, gobies, etc., plus a thousand other fish common to the oceans we had already crossed.

On February 9 the Nautilus cruised in the widest part of the Red Sea, measuring 190 miles straight across from Suakin on the west coast to Qunfidha on the east coast.

At noon that day after our position fix, Captain Nemo climbed onto the platform, where I happened to be.

I vowed not to let him go below again without at least sounding him out on his future plans.

As soon as he saw me, he came over, graciously offered me a cigar, and said to me: "Well, professor, are you pleased with this Red Sea?

Have you seen enough of its hidden wonders, its fish and zoophytes, its gardens of sponges and forests of coral?

Have you glimpsed the towns built on its shores?"

"Yes, Captain Nemo,"

I replied, "and the Nautilus is wonderfully suited to this whole survey.

Ah, it's a clever boat!"

"Yes, sir, clever, daring, and invulnerable!

It fears neither the Red Sea's dreadful storms nor its currents and reefs."

"Indeed,"

I said, "this sea is mentioned as one of the worst, and in the days of the ancients, if I'm not mistaken, it had an abominable reputation."

"Thoroughly abominable, Professor Aronnax.

The Greek and Latin historians can find nothing to say in its favor, and the Greek geographer Strabo adds that it's especially rough during the rainy season and the period of summer prevailing winds.

The Arab Idrisi, referring to it by the name Gulf of Colzoum, relates that ships perished in large numbers on its sandbanks and that no one risked navigating it by night.

This, he claims, is a sea subject to fearful hurricanes, strewn with inhospitable islands, and 'with nothing good to offer,' either on its surface or in its depths.

As a matter of fact, the same views can also be found in Arrian, Agatharchides, and Artemidorus."

"One can easily see,"

I answered, "that those historians didn't navigate aboard the Nautilus."

"Indeed,"

the captain replied with a smile, "and in this respect, the moderns aren't much farther along than the ancients.

It took many centuries to discover the mechanical power of steam!

Who knows whether we'll see a second Nautilus within the next 100 years!

Progress is slow, Professor Aronnax."

"It's true,"

I replied.

"Your ship is a century ahead of its time, perhaps several centuries.

It would be most unfortunate if such a secret were to die with its inventor!"

Captain Nemo did not reply.

After some minutes of silence: "We were discussing,"

he said, "the views of ancient historians on the dangers of navigating this Red Sea?"

"True,"

I replied.

"But weren't their fears exaggerated?"

"Yes and no, Professor Aronnax,"

answered Captain Nemo, who seemed to know "his Red Sea"

by heart.

"To a modern ship, well rigged, solidly constructed, and in control of its course thanks to obedient steam, some conditions are no longer hazardous that offered all sorts of dangers to the vessels of the ancients.

Picture those early navigators venturing forth in sailboats built from planks lashed together with palm-tree ropes, caulked with powdered resin, and coated with dogfish grease.

They didn't even have instruments for taking their bearings, they went by guesswork in the midst of currents they barely knew.

Under such conditions, shipwrecks had to be numerous.

But nowadays steamers providing service between Suez and the South Seas have nothing to fear from the fury of this gulf, despite the contrary winds of its monsoons.

Their captains and passengers no longer prepare for departure with sacrifices to placate the gods, and after returning, they don't traipse in wreaths and gold ribbons to say thanks at the local temple."

"Agreed,"

I said.

"And steam seems to have killed off all gratitude in seamen's hearts.

But since you seem to have made a special study of this sea, captain, can you tell me how it got its name?"

"Many explanations exist on the subject, Professor Aronnax.

Would you like to hear the views of one chronicler in the 14th century?"

"Gladly."

"This fanciful fellow claims the sea was given its name after the crossing of the Israelites, when the Pharaoh perished in those waves that came together again at Moses' command: To mark that miraculous sequel, the sea turned a red without equal.

Thus no other course would do but to name it for its hue."

"An artistic explanation, Captain Nemo,"

I replied, "but I'm unable to rest content with it.

So I'll ask you for your own personal views."

"Here they come.

To my thinking, Professor Aronnax, this 'Red Sea' designation must be regarded as a translation of the Hebrew word 'Edrom,' and if the ancients gave it that name, it was because of the unique color of its waters."

"Until now, however, I've seen only clear waves, without any unique hue."

"Surely, but as we move ahead to the far end of this gulf, you'll note its odd appearance.

I recall seeing the bay of El Tur completely red, like a lake of blood."

"And you attribute this color to the presence of microscopic algae?"

"Yes.

It's a purplish, mucilaginous substance produced by those tiny buds known by the name trichodesmia, 40,000 of which are needed to occupy the space of one square millimeter.

Perhaps you'll encounter them when we reach El Tur."

"Hence, Captain Nemo, this isn't the first time you've gone through the Red Sea aboard the Nautilus?"

"No, sir."

"Then, since you've already mentioned the crossing of the Israelites and the catastrophe that befell the Egyptians, I would ask if you've ever discovered any traces under the waters of that great historic event?"

"No, professor, and for an excellent reason."

"What's that?"

"It's because that same locality where Moses crossed with all his people is now so clogged with sand, camels can barely get their legs wet.

You can understand that my Nautilus wouldn't have enough water for itself."

"And that locality is .

.

.

?"

I asked.

"That locality lies a little above Suez in a sound that used to form a deep estuary when the Red Sea stretched as far as the Bitter Lakes.

Now, whether or not their crossing was literally miraculous, the Israelites did cross there in returning to the Promised Land, and the Pharaoh's army did perish at precisely that locality.

So I think that excavating those sands would bring to light a great many weapons and tools of Egyptian origin."

"Obviously,"

I replied.

"And for the sake of archaeology, let's hope that sooner or later such excavations do take place, once new towns are settled on the isthmus after the Suez Canal has been cut through-- a canal, by the way, of little use to a ship such as the Nautilus!"

"Surely, but of great use to the world at large,"

Captain Nemo said.

"The ancients well understood the usefulness to commerce of connecting the Red Sea with the Mediterranean, but they never dreamed of cutting a canal between the two, and instead they picked the Nile as their link.

If we can trust tradition, it was probably Egypt's King Sesostris who started digging the canal needed to join the Nile with the Red Sea.

What's certain is that in 615 B.C.

King Necho II was hard at work on a canal that was fed by Nile water and ran through the Egyptian plains opposite Arabia.

This canal could be traveled in four days, and it was so wide, two triple-tiered galleys could pass through it abreast.

Its construction was continued by Darius the Great, son of Hystaspes, and probably completed by King Ptolemy II.

Strabo saw it used for shipping; but the weakness of its slope between its starting point, near Bubastis, and the Red Sea left it navigable only a few months out of the year.

This canal served commerce until the century of Rome's Antonine emperors; it was then abandoned and covered with sand, subsequently reinstated by Arabia's Caliph Omar I, and finally filled in for good in 761 or 762 A.D.

by Caliph Al-Mansur, in an effort to prevent supplies from reaching Mohammed ibn Abdullah, who had rebelled against him.

During his Egyptian campaign, your General Napoleon Bonaparte discovered traces of this old canal in the Suez desert, and when the tide caught him by surprise, he wellnigh perished just a few hours before rejoining his regiment at Hadjaroth, the very place where Moses had pitched camp 3,300 years before him."

"Well, captain, what the ancients hesitated to undertake, Mr.

de Lesseps is now finishing up; his joining of these two seas will shorten the route from Cadiz to the East Indies by 9,000 kilometers, and he'll soon change Africa into an immense island."

"Yes, Professor Aronnax, and you have every right to be proud of your fellow countryman.

Such a man brings a nation more honor than the greatest commanders!

Like so many others, he began with difficulties and setbacks, but he triumphed because he has the volunteer spirit.

And it's sad to think that this deed, which should have been an international deed, which would have insured that any administration went down in history, will succeed only through the efforts of one man.

So all hail to Mr.

de Lesseps!"

"Yes, all hail to that great French citizen,"

I replied, quite startled by how emphatically Captain Nemo had just spoken.

"Unfortunately,"

he went on, "I can't take you through that Suez Canal, but the day after tomorrow, you'll be able to see the long jetties of Port Said when we're in the Mediterranean."

"In the Mediterranean!"

I exclaimed.

"Yes, professor.

Does that amaze you?"

"What amazes me is thinking we'll be there the day after tomorrow."

"Oh really?"

"Yes, captain, although since I've been aboard your vessel, I should have formed the habit of not being amazed by anything!"

"But what is it that startles you?"

"The thought of how hideously fast the Nautilus will need to go, if it's to double the Cape of Good Hope, circle around Africa, and lie in the open Mediterranean by the day after tomorrow."

"And who says it will circle Africa, professor?

What's this talk about doubling the Cape of Good Hope?"

"But unless the Nautilus navigates on dry land and crosses over the isthmus--"

"Or under it, Professor Aronnax."

"Under it?"

"Surely,"

Captain Nemo replied serenely.

"Under that tongue of land, nature long ago made what man today is making on its surface."

"What!

There's a passageway?"

"Yes, an underground passageway that I've named the Arabian Tunnel.

It starts below Suez and leads to the Bay of Pelusium."

"But isn't that isthmus only composed of quicksand?"

"To a certain depth.

But at merely fifty meters, one encounters a firm foundation of rock."

"And it's by luck that you discovered this passageway?"

I asked, more and more startled.

"Luck plus logic, professor, and logic even more than luck."

"Captain, I hear you, but I can't believe my ears."

"Oh, sir!

The old saying still holds good: Aures habent et non audient!* Not only does this passageway exist, but I've taken advantage of it on several occasions.

Without it, I wouldn't have ventured today into such a blind alley as the Red Sea."

*Latin: "They have ears but hear not."

Ed.

"Is it indiscreet to ask how you discovered this tunnel?"

"Sir,"

the captain answered me, "there can be no secrets between men who will never leave each other."

I ignored this innuendo and waited for Captain Nemo's explanation.

"Professor,"

he told me, "the simple logic of the naturalist led me to discover this passageway, and I alone am familiar with it.

I'd noted that in the Red Sea and the Mediterranean there exist a number of absolutely identical species of fish: eels, butterfish, greenfish, bass, jewelfish, flying fish.

Certain of this fact, I wondered if there weren't a connection between the two seas.

If there were, its underground current had to go from the Red Sea to the Mediterranean simply because of their difference in level.

So I caught a large number of fish in the vicinity of Suez.

I slipped copper rings around their tails and tossed them back into the sea.

A few months later off the coast of Syria, I recaptured a few specimens of my fish, adorned with their telltale rings.

So this proved to me that some connection existed between the two seas.

I searched for it with my Nautilus, I discovered it, I ventured into it; and soon, professor, you also will have cleared my Arabic tunnel!"

Arabian Tunnel THE SAME DAY, I reported to Conseil and Ned Land that part of the foregoing conversation directly concerning them.

When I told them we would be lying in Mediterranean waters within two days, Conseil clapped his hands, but the Canadian shrugged his shoulders.

"An underwater tunnel!"

he exclaimed.

"A connection between two seas!

Who ever heard of such malarkey!"

"Ned my friend,"

Conseil replied, "had you ever heard of the Nautilus?

No, yet here it is!

So don't shrug your shoulders so blithely, and don't discount something with the feeble excuse that you've never heard of it."

"We'll soon see!"

Ned Land shot back, shaking his head.

"After all, I'd like nothing better than to believe in your captain's little passageway, and may Heaven grant it really does take us to the Mediterranean."

The same evening, at latitude 21 degrees 30' north, the Nautilus was afloat on the surface of the sea and drawing nearer to the Arab coast.

I spotted Jidda, an important financial center for Egypt, Syria, Turkey, and the East Indies.

I could distinguish with reasonable clarity the overall effect of its buildings, the ships made fast along its wharves, and those bigger vessels whose draft of water required them to drop anchor at the port's offshore mooring.

The sun, fairly low on the horizon, struck full force on the houses in this town, accenting their whiteness.

Outside the city limits, some wood or reed huts indicated the quarter where the bedouins lived.

Soon Jidda faded into the shadows of evening, and the Nautilus went back beneath the mildly phosphorescent waters.

The next day, February 10, several ships appeared, running on our opposite tack.

The Nautilus resumed its underwater navigating; but at the moment of our noon sights, the sea was deserted and the ship rose again to its waterline.

With Ned and Conseil, I went to sit on the platform.

The coast to the east looked like a slightly blurred mass in a damp fog.

Leaning against the sides of the skiff, we were chatting of one thing and another, when Ned Land stretched his hand toward a point in the water, saying to me: "See anything out there, professor?"

"No, Ned,"

I replied, "but you know I don't have your eyes."

"Take a good look,"

Ned went on.

"There, ahead to starboard, almost level with the beacon!

Don't you see a mass that seems to be moving around?"

"Right,"

I said after observing carefully, "I can make out something like a long, blackish object on the surface of the water."

"A second Nautilus?"

Conseil said.

"No,"

the Canadian replied, "unless I'm badly mistaken, that's some marine animal."

"Are there whales in the Red Sea?"

Conseil asked.

"Yes, my boy,"

I replied, "they're sometimes found here."

"That's no whale,"

continued Ned Land, whose eyes never strayed from the object they had sighted.

"We're old chums, whales and I, and I couldn't mistake their little ways."

"Let's wait and see,"

Conseil said.

"The Nautilus is heading that direction, and we'll soon know what we're in for."

In fact, that blackish object was soon only a mile away from us.

It looked like a huge reef stranded in midocean.

What was it?

I still couldn't make up my mind.

"Oh, it's moving off!

It's diving!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

"Damnation!

What can that animal be?

It doesn't have a forked tail like baleen whales or sperm whales, and its fins look like sawed-off limbs."

"But in that case--"

I put in.

"Good lord,"

the Canadian went on, "it's rolled over on its back, and it's raising its breasts in the air!"

"It's a siren!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"With all due respect to master, it's an actual mermaid!"

That word "siren"

put me back on track, and I realized that the animal belonged to the order Sirenia: marine creatures that legends have turned into mermaids, half woman, half fish.

"No,"

I told Conseil, "that's no mermaid, it's an unusual creature of which only a few specimens are left in the Red Sea.

That's a dugong."

"Order Sirenia, group Pisciforma, subclass Monodelphia, class Mammalia, branch Vertebrata,"

Conseil replied.

And when Conseil has spoken, there's nothing else to be said.

Meanwhile Ned Land kept staring.

His eyes were gleaming with desire at the sight of that animal.

His hands were ready to hurl a harpoon.

You would have thought he was waiting for the right moment to jump overboard and attack the creature in its own element.

"Oh, sir,"

he told me in a voice trembling with excitement, "I've never killed anything like that!"

His whole being was concentrated in this last word.

Just then Captain Nemo appeared on the platform.

He spotted the dugong.

He understood the Canadian's frame of mind and addressed him directly: "If you held a harpoon, Mr.

Land, wouldn't your hands be itching to put it to work?"

"Positively, sir."

"And just for one day, would it displease you to return to your fisherman's trade and add this cetacean to the list of those you've already hunted down?"

"It wouldn't displease me one bit."

"All right, you can try your luck!"

"Thank you, sir,"

Ned Land replied, his eyes ablaze.

"Only,"

the captain went on, "I urge you to aim carefully at this animal, in your own personal interest."

"Is the dugong dangerous to attack?"

I asked, despite the Canadian's shrug of the shoulders.

"Yes, sometimes,"

the captain replied.

"These animals have been known to turn on their assailants and capsize their longboats.

But with Mr.

Land that danger isn't to be feared.

His eye is sharp, his arm is sure.

If I recommend that he aim carefully at this dugong, it's because the animal is justly regarded as fine game, and I know Mr.

Land doesn't despise a choice morsel."

"Aha!"

the Canadian put in.

"This beast offers the added luxury of being good to eat?"

"Yes, Mr.

Land.

Its flesh is actual red meat, highly prized, and set aside throughout Malaysia for the tables of aristocrats.

Accordingly, this excellent animal has been hunted so bloodthirstily that, like its manatee relatives, it has become more and more scarce."

"In that case, captain,"

Conseil said in all seriousness, "on the offchance that this creature might be the last of its line, wouldn't it be advisable to spare its life, in the interests of science?"

"Maybe,"

the Canadian answered, "it would be better to hunt it down, in the interests of mealtime."

"Then proceed, Mr.

Land,"

Captain Nemo replied.

Just then, as mute and emotionless as ever, seven crewmen climbed onto the platform.

One carried a harpoon and line similar to those used in whale fishing.

Its deck paneling opened, the skiff was wrenched from its socket and launched to sea.

Six rowers sat on the thwarts, and the coxswain took the tiller.

Ned, Conseil, and I found seats in the stern.

"Aren't you coming, captain?"

I asked.

"No, sir, but I wish you happy hunting."

The skiff pulled clear, and carried off by its six oars, it headed swiftly toward the dugong, which by then was floating two miles from the Nautilus.

Arriving within a few cable lengths of the cetacean, our longboat slowed down, and the sculls dipped noiselessly into the tranquil waters.

Harpoon in hand, Ned Land went to take his stand in the skiff's bow.

Harpoons used for hunting whales are usually attached to a very long rope that pays out quickly when the wounded animal drags it with him.

But this rope measured no more than about ten fathoms, and its end had simply been fastened to a small barrel that, while floating, would indicate the dugong's movements beneath the waters.

I stood up and could clearly observe the Canadian's adversary.

This dugong--which also boasts the name halicore--closely resembled a manatee.

Its oblong body ended in a very long caudal fin and its lateral fins in actual fingers.

It differs from the manatee in that its upper jaw is armed with two long, pointed teeth that form diverging tusks on either side.

This dugong that Ned Land was preparing to attack was of colossal dimensions, easily exceeding seven meters in length.

It didn't stir and seemed to be sleeping on the surface of the waves, a circumstance that should have made it easier to capture.

The skiff approached cautiously to within three fathoms of the animal.

The oars hung suspended above their rowlocks.

I was crouching.

His body leaning slightly back, Ned Land brandished his harpoon with expert hands.

Suddenly a hissing sound was audible, and the dugong disappeared.

Although the harpoon had been forcefully hurled, it apparently had hit only water.

"Damnation!"

exclaimed the furious Canadian.

"I missed it!"

"No,"

I said, "the animal's wounded, there's its blood; but your weapon didn't stick in its body."

"My harpoon!

Get my harpoon!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

The sailors went back to their sculling, and the coxswain steered the longboat toward the floating barrel.

We fished up the harpoon, and the skiff started off in pursuit of the animal.

The latter returned from time to time to breathe at the surface of the sea.

Its wound hadn't weakened it because it went with tremendous speed.

Driven by energetic arms, the longboat flew on its trail.

Several times we got within a few fathoms of it, and the Canadian hovered in readiness to strike; but then the dugong would steal away with a sudden dive, and it proved impossible to overtake the beast.

I'll let you assess the degree of anger consuming our impatient Ned Land.

He hurled at the hapless animal the most potent swearwords in the English language.

For my part, I was simply distressed to see this dugong outwit our every scheme.

We chased it unflaggingly for a full hour, and I'd begun to think it would prove too difficult to capture, when the animal got the untimely idea of taking revenge on us, a notion it would soon have cause to regret.

It wheeled on the skiff, to assault us in its turn.

This maneuver did not escape the Canadian.

"Watch out!"

he said.

The coxswain pronounced a few words in his bizarre language, and no doubt he alerted his men to keep on their guard.

Arriving within twenty feet of the skiff, the dugong stopped, sharply sniffing the air with its huge nostrils, pierced not at the tip of its muzzle but on its topside.

Then it gathered itself and sprang at us.

The skiff couldn't avoid the collision.

Half overturned, it shipped a ton or two of water that we had to bail out.

But thanks to our skillful coxswain, we were fouled on the bias rather than broadside, so we didn't capsize.

Clinging to the stempost, Ned Land thrust his harpoon again and again into the gigantic animal, which imbedded its teeth in our gunwale and lifted the longboat out of the water as a lion would lift a deer.

We were thrown on top of each other, and I have no idea how the venture would have ended had not the Canadian, still thirsting for the beast's blood, finally pierced it to the heart.

I heard its teeth grind on sheet iron, and the dugong disappeared, taking our harpoon along with it.

But the barrel soon popped up on the surface, and a few moments later the animal's body appeared and rolled over on its back.

Our skiff rejoined it, took it in tow, and headed to the Nautilus.

It took pulleys of great strength to hoist this dugong onto the platform.

The beast weighed 5,000 kilograms.

It was carved up in sight of the Canadian, who remained to watch every detail of the operation.

At dinner the same day, my steward served me some slices of this flesh, skillfully dressed by the ship's cook.

I found it excellent, even better than veal if not beef.

The next morning, February 11, the Nautilus's pantry was enriched by more dainty game.

A covey of terns alighted on the Nautilus.

They were a species of Sterna nilotica unique to Egypt: beak black, head gray and stippled, eyes surrounded by white dots, back, wings, and tail grayish, belly and throat white, feet red.

Also caught were a couple dozen Nile duck, superior-tasting wildfowl whose neck and crown of the head are white speckled with black.

By then the Nautilus had reduced speed.

It moved ahead at a saunter, so to speak.

I observed that the Red Sea's water was becoming less salty the closer we got to Suez.

Near five o'clock in the afternoon, we sighted Cape Ras Mohammed to the north.

This cape forms the tip of Arabia Petraea, which lies between the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba.

The Nautilus entered the Strait of Jubal, which leads to the Gulf of Suez.

I could clearly make out a high mountain crowning Ras Mohammed between the two gulfs.

It was Mt.

Horeb, that biblical Mt.

Sinai on whose summit Moses met God face to face, that summit the mind's eye always pictures as wreathed in lightning.

At six o'clock, sometimes afloat and sometimes submerged, the Nautilus passed well out from El Tur, which sat at the far end of a bay whose waters seemed to be dyed red, as Captain Nemo had already mentioned.

Then night fell in the midst of a heavy silence occasionally broken by the calls of pelicans and nocturnal birds, by the sound of surf chafing against rocks, or by the distant moan of a steamer churning the waves of the gulf with noisy blades.

From eight to nine o'clock, the Nautilus stayed a few meters beneath the waters.

According to my calculations, we had to be quite close to Suez.

Through the panels in the lounge, I spotted rocky bottoms brightly lit by our electric rays.

It seemed to me that the strait was getting narrower and narrower.

At 9:15 when our boat returned to the surface, I climbed onto the platform.

I was quite impatient to clear Captain Nemo's tunnel, couldn't sit still, and wanted to breathe the fresh night air.

Soon, in the shadows, I spotted a pale signal light glimmering a mile away, half discolored by mist.

"A floating lighthouse,"

said someone next to me.

I turned and discovered the captain.

"That's the floating signal light of Suez,"

he went on.

"It won't be long before we reach the entrance to the tunnel."

"It can't be very easy to enter it."

"No, sir.

Accordingly, I'm in the habit of staying in the pilothouse and directing maneuvers myself.

And now if you'll kindly go below, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus is about to sink beneath the waves, and it will only return to the surface after we've cleared the Arabian Tunnel."

I followed Captain Nemo.

The hatch closed, the ballast tanks filled with water, and the submersible sank some ten meters down.

Just as I was about to repair to my stateroom, the captain stopped me.

"Professor,"

he said to me, "would you like to go with me to the wheelhouse?"

"I was afraid to ask,"

I replied.

"Come along, then.

This way, you'll learn the full story about this combination underwater and underground navigating."

Captain Nemo led me to the central companionway.

In midstair he opened a door, went along the upper gangways, and arrived at the wheelhouse, which, as you know, stands at one end of the platform.

It was a cabin measuring six feet square and closely resembling those occupied by the helmsmen of steamboats on the Mississippi or Hudson rivers.

In the center stood an upright wheel geared to rudder cables running to the Nautilus's stern.

Set in the cabin's walls were four deadlights, windows of biconvex glass that enabled the man at the helm to see in every direction.

The cabin was dark; but my eyes soon grew accustomed to its darkness and I saw the pilot, a muscular man whose hands rested on the pegs of the wheel.

Outside, the sea was brightly lit by the beacon shining behind the cabin at the other end of the platform.

"Now,"

Captain Nemo said, "let's look for our passageway."

Electric wires linked the pilothouse with the engine room, and from this cabin the captain could simultaneously signal heading and speed to his Nautilus.

He pressed a metal button and at once the propeller slowed down significantly.

I stared in silence at the high, sheer wall we were skirting just then, the firm base of the sandy mountains on the coast.

For an hour we went along it in this fashion, staying only a few meters away.

Captain Nemo never took his eyes off the two concentric circles of the compass hanging in the cabin.

At a mere gesture from him, the helmsman would instantly change the Nautilus's heading.

Standing by the port deadlight, I spotted magnificent coral substructures, zoophytes, algae, and crustaceans with enormous quivering claws that stretched forth from crevices in the rock.

At 10:15 Captain Nemo himself took the helm.

Dark and deep, a wide gallery opened ahead of us.

The Nautilus was brazenly swallowed up.

Strange rumblings were audible along our sides.

It was the water of the Red Sea, hurled toward the Mediterranean by the tunnel's slope.

Our engines tried to offer resistance by churning the waves with propeller in reverse, but the Nautilus went with the torrent, as swift as an arrow.

Along the narrow walls of this passageway, I saw only brilliant streaks, hard lines, fiery furrows, all scrawled by our speeding electric light.

With my hand I tried to curb the pounding of my heart.

At 10:35 Captain Nemo left the steering wheel and turned to me: "The Mediterranean,"

he told me.

In less than twenty minutes, swept along by the torrent, the Nautilus had just cleared the Isthmus of Suez.

The Greek Islands AT SUNRISE the next morning, February 12, the Nautilus rose to the surface of the waves.

I rushed onto the platform.

The hazy silhouette of Pelusium was outlined three miles to the south.

A torrent had carried us from one sea to the other.

But although that tunnel was easy to descend, going back up must have been impossible.

Near seven o'clock Ned and Conseil joined me.

Those two inseparable companions had slept serenely, utterly unaware of the Nautilus's feat.

"Well, Mr.

Naturalist,"

the Canadian asked in a gently mocking tone, "and how about that Mediterranean?"

"We're floating on its surface, Ned my friend."

"What!"

Conseil put in.

"Last night .

.

.

?"

"Yes, last night, in a matter of minutes, we cleared that insuperable isthmus."

"I don't believe a word of it,"

the Canadian replied.

"And you're in the wrong, Mr.

Land,"

I went on.

"That flat coastline curving southward is the coast of Egypt."

"Tell it to the marines, sir,"

answered the stubborn Canadian.

"But if master says so,"

Conseil told him, "then so be it."

"What's more, Ned,"

I said, "Captain Nemo himself did the honors in his tunnel, and I stood beside him in the pilothouse while he steered the Nautilus through that narrow passageway."

"You hear, Ned?"

Conseil said.

"And you, Ned, who have such good eyes,"

I added, "you can spot the jetties of Port Said stretching out to sea."

The Canadian looked carefully.

"Correct,"

he said.

"You're right, professor, and your captain's a superman.

We're in the Mediterranean.

Fine.

So now let's have a chat about our little doings, if you please, but in such a way that nobody overhears."

I could easily see what the Canadian was driving at.

In any event, I thought it best to let him have his chat, and we all three went to sit next to the beacon, where we were less exposed to the damp spray from the billows.

"Now, Ned, we're all ears,"

I said.

"What have you to tell us?"

"What I've got to tell you is very simple,"

the Canadian replied.

"We're in Europe, and before Captain Nemo's whims take us deep into the polar seas or back to Oceania, I say we should leave this Nautilus."

I confess that such discussions with the Canadian always baffled me.

I didn't want to restrict my companions' freedom in any way, and yet I had no desire to leave Captain Nemo.

Thanks to him and his submersible, I was finishing my undersea research by the day, and I was rewriting my book on the great ocean depths in the midst of its very element.

Would I ever again have such an opportunity to observe the ocean's wonders?

Absolutely not!

So I couldn't entertain this idea of leaving the Nautilus before completing our course of inquiry.

"Ned my friend,"

I said, "answer me honestly.

Are you bored with this ship?

Are you sorry that fate has cast you into Captain Nemo's hands?"

The Canadian paused for a short while before replying.

Then, crossing his arms: "Honestly,"

he said, "I'm not sorry about this voyage under the seas.

I'll be glad to have done it, but in order to have done it, it has to finish.

That's my feeling."

"It will finish, Ned."

"Where and when?"

"Where?

I don't know.

When?

I can't say.

Or, rather, I suppose it will be over when these seas have nothing more to teach us.

Everything that begins in this world must inevitably come to an end."

"I think as master does,"

Conseil replied, "and it's extremely possible that after crossing every sea on the globe, Captain Nemo will bid the three of us a fond farewell."

"Bid us a fond farewell?"

the Canadian exclaimed.

"You mean beat us to a fare-thee-well!"

"Let's not exaggerate, Mr.

Land,"

I went on.

"We have nothing to fear from the captain, but neither do I share Conseil's views.

We're privy to the Nautilus's secrets, and I don't expect that its commander, just to set us free, will meekly stand by while we spread those secrets all over the world."

"But in that case what do you expect?"

the Canadian asked.

"That we'll encounter advantageous conditions for escaping just as readily in six months as now."

"Great Scott!"

Ned Land put in.

"And where, if you please, will we be in six months, Mr.

Naturalist?"

"Perhaps here, perhaps in China.

You know how quickly the Nautilus moves.

It crosses oceans like swallows cross the air or express trains continents.

It doesn't fear heavily traveled seas.

Who can say it won't hug the coasts of France, England, or America, where an escape attempt could be carried out just as effectively as here."

"Professor Aronnax,"

the Canadian replied, "your arguments are rotten to the core.

You talk way off in the future: 'We'll be here, we'll be there!' Me, I'm talking about right now: we are here, and we must take advantage of it!"

I was hard pressed by Ned Land's common sense, and I felt myself losing ground.

I no longer knew what arguments to put forward on my behalf.

"Sir,"

Ned went on, "let's suppose that by some impossibility, Captain Nemo offered your freedom to you this very day.

Would you accept?"

"I don't know,"

I replied.

"And suppose he adds that this offer he's making you today won't ever be repeated, then would you accept?"

I did not reply.

"And what thinks our friend Conseil?"

Ned Land asked.

"Your friend Conseil,"

the fine lad replied serenely, "has nothing to say for himself.

He's a completely disinterested party on this question.

Like his master, like his comrade Ned, he's a bachelor.

Neither wife, parents, nor children are waiting for him back home.

He's in master's employ, he thinks like master, he speaks like master, and much to his regret, he can't be counted on to form a majority.

Only two persons face each other here: master on one side, Ned Land on the other.

That said, your friend Conseil is listening, and he's ready to keep score."

I couldn't help smiling as Conseil wiped himself out of existence.

Deep down, the Canadian must have been overjoyed at not having to contend with him.

"Then, sir,"

Ned Land said, "since Conseil is no more, we'll have this discussion between just the two of us.

I've talked, you've listened.

What's your reply?"

It was obvious that the matter had to be settled, and evasions were distasteful to me.

"Ned my friend,"

I said, "here's my reply.

You have right on your side and my arguments can't stand up to yours.

It will never do to count on Captain Nemo's benevolence.

The most ordinary good sense would forbid him to set us free.

On the other hand, good sense decrees that we take advantage of our first opportunity to leave the Nautilus."

"Fine, Professor Aronnax, that's wisely said."

"But one proviso,"

I said, "just one.

The opportunity must be the real thing.

Our first attempt to escape must succeed, because if it misfires, we won't get a second chance, and Captain Nemo will never forgive us."

"That's also well put,"

the Canadian replied.

"But your proviso applies to any escape attempt, whether it happens in two years or two days.

So this is still the question: if a promising opportunity comes up, we have to grab it."

"Agreed.

And now, Ned, will you tell me what you mean by a promising opportunity?"

"One that leads the Nautilus on a cloudy night within a short distance of some European coast."

"And you'll try to get away by swimming?"

"Yes, if we're close enough to shore and the ship's afloat on the surface.

No, if we're well out and the ship's navigating under the waters."

"And in that event?"

"In that event I'll try to get hold of the skiff.

I know how to handle it.

We'll stick ourselves inside, undo the bolts, and rise to the surface, without the helmsman in the bow seeing a thing."

"Fine, Ned.

Stay on the lookout for such an opportunity, but don't forget, one slipup will finish us."

"I won't forget, sir."

"And now, Ned, would you like to know my overall thinking on your plan?"

"Gladly, Professor Aronnax."

"Well then, I think--and I don't mean 'I hope'--that your promising opportunity won't ever arise."

"Why not?"

"Because Captain Nemo recognizes that we haven't given up all hope of recovering our freedom, and he'll keep on his guard, above all in seas within sight of the coasts of Europe."

"I'm of master's opinion,"

Conseil said.

"We'll soon see,"

Ned Land replied, shaking his head with a determined expression.

"And now, Ned Land,"

I added, "let's leave it at that.

Not another word on any of this.

The day you're ready, alert us and we're with you.

I turn it all over to you."

That's how we ended this conversation, which later was to have such serious consequences.

At first, I must say, events seemed to confirm my forecasts, much to the Canadian's despair.

Did Captain Nemo view us with distrust in these heavily traveled seas, or did he simply want to hide from the sight of those ships of every nation that plowed the Mediterranean?

I have no idea, but usually he stayed in midwater and well out from any coast.

Either the Nautilus surfaced only enough to let its pilothouse emerge, or it slipped away to the lower depths, although, between the Greek Islands and Asia Minor, we didn't find bottom even at 2,000 meters down.

Accordingly, I became aware of the isle of Karpathos, one of the Sporades Islands, only when Captain Nemo placed his finger over a spot on the world map and quoted me this verse from Virgil: Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vates Caeruleus Proteus .

.

.* *Latin: "There in King Neptune's domain by Karpathos, his spokesman / is azure-hued Proteus .

.

.

"

Ed.

It was indeed that bygone abode of Proteus, the old shepherd of King Neptune's flocks: an island located between Rhodes and Crete, which Greeks now call Karpathos, Italians Scarpanto.

Through the lounge window I could see only its granite bedrock.

The next day, February 14, I decided to spend a few hours studying the fish of this island group; but for whatever reason, the panels remained hermetically sealed.

After determining the Nautilus's heading, I noted that it was proceeding toward the ancient island of Crete, also called Candia.

At the time I had shipped aboard the Abraham Lincoln, this whole island was in rebellion against its tyrannical rulers, the Ottoman Empire of Turkey.

But since then I had absolutely no idea what happened to this revolution, and Captain Nemo, deprived of all contact with the shore, was hardly the man to keep me informed.

So I didn't allude to this event when, that evening, I chanced to be alone with the captain in the lounge.

Besides, he seemed silent and preoccupied.

Then, contrary to custom, he ordered that both panels in the lounge be opened, and going from the one to the other, he carefully observed the watery mass.

For what purpose?

I hadn't a guess, and for my part, I spent my time studying the fish that passed before my eyes.

Among others I noted that sand goby mentioned by Aristotle and commonly known by the name sea loach, which is encountered exclusively in the salty waters next to the Nile Delta.

Near them some semiphosphorescent red porgy rolled by, a variety of gilthead that the Egyptians ranked among their sacred animals, lauding them in religious ceremonies when their arrival in the river's waters announced the fertile flood season.

I also noticed some wrasse known as the tapiro, three decimeters long, bony fish with transparent scales whose bluish gray color is mixed with red spots; they're enthusiastic eaters of marine vegetables, which gives them an exquisite flavor; hence these tapiro were much in demand by the epicures of ancient Rome, and their entrails were dressed with brains of peacock, tongue of flamingo, and testes of moray to make that divine platter that so enraptured the Roman emperor Vitellius.

Another resident of these seas caught my attention and revived all my memories of antiquity.

This was the remora, which travels attached to the bellies of sharks; as the ancients tell it, when these little fish cling to the undersides of a ship, they can bring it to a halt, and by so impeding Mark Antony's vessel during the Battle of Actium, one of them facilitated the victory of Augustus Caesar.

From such slender threads hang the destinies of nations!

I also observed some wonderful snappers belonging to the order Lutianida, sacred fish for the Greeks, who claimed they could drive off sea monsters from the waters they frequent; their Greek name anthias means "flower,"

and they live up to it in the play of their colors and in those fleeting reflections that turn their dorsal fins into watered silk; their hues are confined to a gamut of reds, from the pallor of pink to the glow of ruby.

I couldn't take my eyes off these marine wonders, when I was suddenly jolted by an unexpected apparition.

In the midst of the waters, a man appeared, a diver carrying a little leather bag at his belt.

It was no corpse lost in the waves.

It was a living man, swimming vigorously, sometimes disappearing to breathe at the surface, then instantly diving again.

I turned to Captain Nemo, and in an agitated voice: "A man!

A castaway!"

I exclaimed.

"We must rescue him at all cost!"

The captain didn't reply but went to lean against the window.

The man drew near, and gluing his face to the panel, he stared at us.

To my deep astonishment, Captain Nemo gave him a signal.

The diver answered with his hand, immediately swam up to the surface of the sea, and didn't reappear.

"Don't be alarmed,"

the captain told me.

"That's Nicolas from Cape Matapan, nicknamed 'Il Pesce.'* He's well known throughout the Cyclades Islands.

A bold diver!

Water is his true element, and he lives in the sea more than on shore, going constantly from one island to another, even to Crete."

*Italian: "The Fish."

Ed.

"You know him, captain?"

"Why not, Professor Aronnax?"

This said, Captain Nemo went to a cabinet standing near the lounge's left panel.

Next to this cabinet I saw a chest bound with hoops of iron, its lid bearing a copper plaque that displayed the Nautilus's monogram with its motto Mobilis in Mobili.

Just then, ignoring my presence, the captain opened this cabinet, a sort of safe that contained a large number of ingots.

They were gold ingots.

And they represented an enormous sum of money.

Where had this precious metal come from?

How had the captain amassed this gold, and what was he about to do with it?

I didn't pronounce a word.

I gaped.

Captain Nemo took out the ingots one by one and arranged them methodically inside the chest, filling it to the top.

At which point I estimate that it held more than 1,000 kilograms of gold, in other words, close to 5,000,000 francs.

After securely fastening the chest, Captain Nemo wrote an address on its lid in characters that must have been modern Greek.

This done, the captain pressed a button whose wiring was in communication with the crew's quarters.

Four men appeared and, not without difficulty, pushed the chest out of the lounge.

Then I heard them hoist it up the iron companionway by means of pulleys.

Just then Captain Nemo turned to me: "You were saying, professor?"

he asked me.

"I wasn't saying a thing, captain."

"Then, sir, with your permission, I'll bid you good evening."

And with that, Captain Nemo left the lounge.

I reentered my stateroom, very puzzled, as you can imagine.

I tried in vain to fall asleep.

I kept searching for a relationship between the appearance of the diver and that chest filled with gold.

Soon, from certain rolling and pitching movements, I sensed that the Nautilus had left the lower strata and was back on the surface of the water.

Then I heard the sound of footsteps on the platform.

I realized that the skiff was being detached and launched to sea.

For an instant it bumped the Nautilus's side, then all sounds ceased.

Two hours later, the same noises, the same comings and goings, were repeated.

Hoisted on board, the longboat was readjusted into its socket, and the Nautilus plunged back beneath the waves.

So those millions had been delivered to their address.

At what spot on the continent?

Who was the recipient of Captain Nemo's gold?

The next day I related the night's events to Conseil and the Canadian, events that had aroused my curiosity to a fever pitch.

My companions were as startled as I was.

"But where does he get those millions?"

Ned Land asked.

To this no reply was possible.

After breakfast I made my way to the lounge and went about my work.

I wrote up my notes until five o'clock in the afternoon.

Just then--was it due to some personal indisposition?--I felt extremely hot and had to take off my jacket made of fan mussel fabric.

A perplexing circumstance because we weren't in the low latitudes, and besides, once the Nautilus was submerged, it shouldn't be subject to any rise in temperature.

I looked at the pressure gauge.

It marked a depth of sixty feet, a depth beyond the reach of atmospheric heat.

I kept on working, but the temperature rose to the point of becoming unbearable.

"Could there be a fire on board?"

I wondered.

I was about to leave the lounge when Captain Nemo entered.

He approached the thermometer, consulted it, and turned to me: "42 degrees centigrade,"

he said.

"I've detected as much, captain,"

I replied, "and if it gets even slightly hotter, we won't be able to stand it."

"Oh, professor, it won't get any hotter unless we want it to!"

"You mean you can control this heat?"

"No, but I can back away from the fireplace producing it."

"So it's outside?"

"Surely.

We're cruising in a current of boiling water."

"It can't be!"

I exclaimed.

"Look."

The panels had opened, and I could see a completely white sea around the Nautilus.

Steaming sulfurous fumes uncoiled in the midst of waves bubbling like water in a boiler.

I leaned my hand against one of the windows, but the heat was so great, I had to snatch it back.

"Where are we?"

I asked.

"Near the island of Santorini, professor,"

the captain answered me, "and right in the channel that separates the volcanic islets of Nea Kameni and Palea Kameni.

I wanted to offer you the unusual sight of an underwater eruption."

"I thought,"

I said, "that the formation of such new islands had come to an end."

"Nothing ever comes to an end in these volcanic waterways,"

Captain Nemo replied, "and thanks to its underground fires, our globe is continuously under construction in these regions.

According to the Latin historians Cassiodorus and Pliny, by the year 19 of the Christian era, a new island, the divine Thera, had already appeared in the very place these islets have more recently formed.

Then Thera sank under the waves, only to rise and sink once more in the year 69 A.D.

From that day to this, such plutonic construction work has been in abeyance.

But on February 3, 1866, a new islet named George Island emerged in the midst of sulfurous steam near Nea Kameni and was fused to it on the 6th of the same month.

Seven days later, on February 13, the islet of Aphroessa appeared, leaving a ten-meter channel between itself and Nea Kameni.

I was in these seas when that phenomenon occurred and I was able to observe its every phase.

The islet of Aphroessa was circular in shape, measuring 300 feet in diameter and thirty feet in height.

It was made of black, glassy lava mixed with bits of feldspar.

Finally, on March 10, a smaller islet called Reka appeared next to Nea Kameni, and since then, these three islets have fused to form one single, selfsame island."

"What about this channel we're in right now?"

I asked.

"Here it is,"

Captain Nemo replied, showing me a chart of the Greek Islands.

"You observe that I've entered the new islets in their place."

"But will this channel fill up one day?"

"Very likely, Professor Aronnax, because since 1866 eight little lava islets have surged up in front of the port of St.

Nicolas on Palea Kameni.

So it's obvious that Nea and Palea will join in days to come.

In the middle of the Pacific, tiny infusoria build continents, but here they're built by volcanic phenomena.

Look, sir!

Look at the construction work going on under these waves."

I returned to the window.

The Nautilus was no longer moving.

The heat had become unbearable.

From the white it had recently been, the sea was turning red, a coloration caused by the presence of iron salts.

Although the lounge was hermetically sealed, it was filling with an intolerable stink of sulfur, and I could see scarlet flames of such brightness, they overpowered our electric light.

I was swimming in perspiration, I was stifling, I was about to be cooked.

Yes, I felt myself cooking in actual fact!

"We can't stay any longer in this boiling water,"

I told the captain.

"No, it wouldn't be advisable,"

replied Nemo the Emotionless.

He gave an order.

The Nautilus tacked about and retreated from this furnace it couldn't brave with impunity.

A quarter of an hour later, we were breathing fresh air on the surface of the waves.

It then occurred to me that if Ned had chosen these waterways for our escape attempt, we wouldn't have come out alive from this sea of fire.

The next day, February 16, we left this basin, which tallies depths of 3,000 meters between Rhodes and Alexandria, and passing well out from Cerigo Island after doubling Cape Matapan, the Nautilus left the Greek Islands behind.

The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours THE MEDITERRANEAN, your ideal blue sea: to Greeks simply "the sea,"

to Hebrews "the great sea,"

to Romans mare nostrum.* Bordered by orange trees, aloes, cactus, and maritime pine trees, perfumed with the scent of myrtle, framed by rugged mountains, saturated with clean, transparent air but continuously under construction by fires in the earth, this sea is a genuine battlefield where Neptune and Pluto still struggle for world domination.

Here on these beaches and waters, says the French historian Michelet, a man is revived by one of the most invigorating climates in the world.

*Latin: "our sea."

Ed.

But as beautiful as it was, I could get only a quick look at this basin whose surface area comprises 2,000,000 square kilometers.

Even Captain Nemo's personal insights were denied me, because that mystifying individual didn't appear one single time during our high-speed crossing.

I estimate that the Nautilus covered a track of some 600 leagues under the waves of this sea, and this voyage was accomplished in just twenty-four hours times two.

Departing from the waterways of Greece on the morning of February 16, we cleared the Strait of Gibraltar by sunrise on the 18th.

It was obvious to me that this Mediterranean, pinned in the middle of those shores he wanted to avoid, gave Captain Nemo no pleasure.

Its waves and breezes brought back too many memories, if not too many regrets.

Here he no longer had the ease of movement and freedom of maneuver that the oceans allowed him, and his Nautilus felt cramped so close to the coasts of both Africa and Europe.

Accordingly, our speed was twenty-five miles (that is, twelve four-kilometer leagues) per hour.

Needless to say, Ned Land had to give up his escape plans, much to his distress.

Swept along at the rate of twelve to thirteen meters per second, he could hardly make use of the skiff.

Leaving the Nautilus under these conditions would have been like jumping off a train racing at this speed, a rash move if there ever was one.

Moreover, to renew our air supply, the submersible rose to the surface of the waves only at night, and relying solely on compass and log, it steered by dead reckoning.

Inside the Mediterranean, then, I could catch no more of its fast-passing scenery than a traveler might see from an express train; in other words, I could view only the distant horizons because the foregrounds flashed by like lightning.

But Conseil and I were able to observe those Mediterranean fish whose powerful fins kept pace for a while in the Nautilus's waters.

We stayed on watch before the lounge windows, and our notes enable me to reconstruct, in a few words, the ichthyology of this sea.

Among the various fish inhabiting it, some I viewed, others I glimpsed, and the rest I missed completely because of the Nautilus's speed.

Kindly allow me to sort them out using this whimsical system of classification.

It will at least convey the quickness of my observations.

In the midst of the watery mass, brightly lit by our electric beams, there snaked past those one-meter lampreys that are common to nearly every clime.

A type of ray from the genus Oxyrhynchus, five feet wide, had a white belly with a spotted, ash-gray back and was carried along by the currents like a huge, wide-open shawl.

Other rays passed by so quickly I couldn't tell if they deserved that name "eagle ray"

coined by the ancient Greeks, or those designations of "rat ray,"

"bat ray,"

and "toad ray"

that modern fishermen have inflicted on them.

Dogfish known as topes, twelve feet long and especially feared by divers, were racing with each other.

Looking like big bluish shadows, thresher sharks went by, eight feet long and gifted with an extremely acute sense of smell.

Dorados from the genus Sparus, some measuring up to thirteen decimeters, appeared in silver and azure costumes encircled with ribbons, which contrasted with the dark color of their fins; fish sacred to the goddess Venus, their eyes set in brows of gold; a valuable species that patronizes all waters fresh or salt, equally at home in rivers, lakes, and oceans, living in every clime, tolerating any temperature, their line dating back to prehistoric times on this earth yet preserving all its beauty from those far-off days.

Magnificent sturgeons, nine to ten meters long and extremely fast, banged their powerful tails against the glass of our panels, showing bluish backs with small brown spots; they resemble sharks, without equaling their strength, and are encountered in every sea; in the spring they delight in swimming up the great rivers, fighting the currents of the Volga, Danube, Po, Rhine, Loire, and Oder, while feeding on herring, mackerel, salmon, and codfish; although they belong to the class of cartilaginous fish, they rate as a delicacy; they're eaten fresh, dried, marinated, or salt-preserved, and in olden times they were borne in triumph to the table of the Roman epicure Lucullus.

But whenever the Nautilus drew near the surface, those denizens of the Mediterranean I could observe most productively belonged to the sixty-third genus of bony fish.

These were tuna from the genus Scomber, blue-black on top, silver on the belly armor, their dorsal stripes giving off a golden gleam.

They are said to follow ships in search of refreshing shade from the hot tropical sun, and they did just that with the Nautilus, as they had once done with the vessels of the Count de La Prouse.

For long hours they competed in speed with our submersible.

I couldn't stop marveling at these animals so perfectly cut out for racing, their heads small, their bodies sleek, spindle-shaped, and in some cases over three meters long, their pectoral fins gifted with remarkable strength, their caudal fins forked.

Like certain flocks of birds, whose speed they equal, these tuna swim in triangle formation, which prompted the ancients to say they'd boned up on geometry and military strategy.

And yet they can't escape the Provenal fishermen, who prize them as highly as did the ancient inhabitants of Turkey and Italy; and these valuable animals, as oblivious as if they were deaf and blind, leap right into the Marseilles tuna nets and perish by the thousands.

Just for the record, I'll mention those Mediterranean fish that Conseil and I barely glimpsed.

There were whitish eels of the species Gymnotus fasciatus that passed like elusive wisps of steam, conger eels three to four meters long that were tricked out in green, blue, and yellow, three-foot hake with a liver that makes a dainty morsel, wormfish drifting like thin seaweed, sea robins that poets call lyrefish and seamen pipers and whose snouts have two jagged triangular plates shaped like old Homer's lyre, swallowfish swimming as fast as the bird they're named after, redheaded groupers whose dorsal fins are trimmed with filaments, some shad (spotted with black, gray, brown, blue, yellow, and green) that actually respond to tinkling handbells, splendid diamond-shaped turbot that were like aquatic pheasants with yellowish fins stippled in brown and the left topside mostly marbled in brown and yellow, finally schools of wonderful red mullet, real oceanic birds of paradise that ancient Romans bought for as much as 10,000 sesterces apiece, and which they killed at the table, so they could heartlessly watch it change color from cinnabar red when alive to pallid white when dead.

And as for other fish common to the Atlantic and Mediterranean, I was unable to observe miralets, triggerfish, puffers, seahorses, jewelfish, trumpetfish, blennies, gray mullet, wrasse, smelt, flying fish, anchovies, sea bream, porgies, garfish, or any of the chief representatives of the order Pleuronecta, such as sole, flounder, plaice, dab, and brill, simply because of the dizzying speed with which the Nautilus hustled through these opulent waters.

As for marine mammals, on passing by the mouth of the Adriatic Sea, I thought I recognized two or three sperm whales equipped with the single dorsal fin denoting the genus Physeter, some pilot whales from the genus Globicephalus exclusive to the Mediterranean, the forepart of the head striped with small distinct lines, and also a dozen seals with white bellies and black coats, known by the name monk seals and just as solemn as if they were three-meter Dominicans.

For his part, Conseil thought he spotted a turtle six feet wide and adorned with three protruding ridges that ran lengthwise.

I was sorry to miss this reptile, because from Conseil's description, I believe I recognized the leatherback turtle, a pretty rare species.

For my part, I noted only some loggerhead turtles with long carapaces.

As for zoophytes, for a few moments I was able to marvel at a wonderful, orange-hued hydra from the genus Galeolaria that clung to the glass of our port panel; it consisted of a long, lean filament that spread out into countless branches and ended in the most delicate lace ever spun by the followers of Arachne.

Unfortunately I couldn't fish up this wonderful specimen, and surely no other Mediterranean zoophytes would have been offered to my gaze, if, on the evening of the 16th, the Nautilus hadn't slowed down in an odd fashion.

This was the situation.

By then we were passing between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia.

In the cramped space between Cape Bon and the Strait of Messina, the sea bottom rises almost all at once.

It forms an actual ridge with only seventeen meters of water remaining above it, while the depth on either side is 170 meters.

Consequently, the Nautilus had to maneuver with caution so as not to bump into this underwater barrier.

I showed Conseil the position of this long reef on our chart of the Mediterranean.

"But with all due respect to master,"

Conseil ventured to observe, "it's like an actual isthmus connecting Europe to Africa."

"Yes, my boy,"

I replied, "it cuts across the whole Strait of Sicily, and Smith's soundings prove that in the past, these two continents were genuinely connected between Cape Boeo and Cape Farina."

"I can easily believe it,"

Conseil said.

"I might add,"

I went on, "that there's a similar barrier between Gibraltar and Ceuta, and in prehistoric times it closed off the Mediterranean completely."

"Gracious!"

Conseil put in.

"Suppose one day some volcanic upheaval raises these two barriers back above the waves!"

"That's most unlikely, Conseil."

"If master will allow me to finish, I mean that if this phenomenon occurs, it might prove distressing to Mr.

de Lesseps, who has gone to such pains to cut through his isthmus!"

"Agreed, but I repeat, Conseil: such a phenomenon won't occur.

The intensity of these underground forces continues to diminish.

Volcanoes were quite numerous in the world's early days, but they're going extinct one by one; the heat inside the earth is growing weaker, the temperature in the globe's lower strata is cooling appreciably every century, and to our globe's detriment, because its heat is its life."

"But the sun--"

"The sun isn't enough, Conseil.

Can it restore heat to a corpse?"

"Not that I've heard."

"Well, my friend, someday the earth will be just such a cold corpse.

Like the moon, which long ago lost its vital heat, our globe will become lifeless and unlivable."

"In how many centuries?"

Conseil asked.

"In hundreds of thousands of years, my boy."

"Then we have ample time to finish our voyage,"

Conseil replied, "if Ned Land doesn't mess things up!"

Thus reassured, Conseil went back to studying the shallows that the Nautilus was skimming at moderate speed.

On the rocky, volcanic seafloor, there bloomed quite a collection of moving flora: sponges, sea cucumbers, jellyfish called sea gooseberries that were adorned with reddish tendrils and gave off a subtle phosphorescence, members of the genus Beroe that are commonly known by the name melon jellyfish and are bathed in the shimmer of the whole solar spectrum, free-swimming crinoids one meter wide that reddened the waters with their crimson hue, treelike basket stars of the greatest beauty, sea fans from the genus Pavonacea with long stems, numerous edible sea urchins of various species, plus green sea anemones with a grayish trunk and a brown disk lost beneath the olive-colored tresses of their tentacles.

Conseil kept especially busy observing mollusks and articulates, and although his catalog is a little dry, I wouldn't want to wrong the gallant lad by leaving out his personal observations.

From the branch Mollusca, he mentions numerous comb-shaped scallops, hooflike spiny oysters piled on top of each other, triangular coquina, three-pronged glass snails with yellow fins and transparent shells, orange snails from the genus Pleurobranchus that looked like eggs spotted or speckled with greenish dots, members of the genus Aplysia also known by the name sea hares, other sea hares from the genus Dolabella, plump paper-bubble shells, umbrella shells exclusive to the Mediterranean, abalone whose shell produces a mother-of-pearl much in demand, pilgrim scallops, saddle shells that diners in the French province of Languedoc are said to like better than oysters, some of those cockleshells so dear to the citizens of Marseilles, fat white venus shells that are among the clams so abundant off the coasts of North America and eaten in such quantities by New Yorkers, variously colored comb shells with gill covers, burrowing date mussels with a peppery flavor I relish, furrowed heart cockles whose shells have riblike ridges on their arching summits, triton shells pocked with scarlet bumps, carniaira snails with backward-curving tips that make them resemble flimsy gondolas, crowned ferola snails, atlanta snails with spiral shells, gray nudibranchs from the genus Tethys that were spotted with white and covered by fringed mantles, nudibranchs from the suborder Eolidea that looked like small slugs, sea butterflies crawling on their backs, seashells from the genus Auricula including the oval-shaped Auricula myosotis, tan wentletrap snails, common periwinkles, violet snails, cineraira snails, rock borers, ear shells, cabochon snails, pandora shells, etc.

As for the articulates, in his notes Conseil has very appropriately divided them into six classes, three of which belong to the marine world.

These classes are the Crustacea, Cirripedia, and Annelida.

Crustaceans are subdivided into nine orders, and the first of these consists of the decapods, in other words, animals whose head and thorax are usually fused, whose cheek-and-mouth mechanism is made up of several pairs of appendages, and whose thorax has four, five, or six pairs of walking legs.

Conseil used the methods of our mentor Professor Milne-Edwards, who puts the decapods in three divisions: Brachyura, Macrura, and Anomura.

These names may look a tad fierce, but they're accurate and appropriate.

Among the Brachyura, Conseil mentions some amanthia crabs whose fronts were armed with two big diverging tips, those inachus scorpions that-- lord knows why--symbolized wisdom to the ancient Greeks, spider crabs of the massena and spinimane varieties that had probably gone astray in these shallows because they usually live in the lower depths, xanthid crabs, pilumna crabs, rhomboid crabs, granular box crabs (easy on the digestion, as Conseil ventured to observe), toothless masked crabs, ebalia crabs, cymopolia crabs, woolly-handed crabs, etc.

Among the Macrura (which are subdivided into five families: hardshells, burrowers, crayfish, prawns, and ghost crabs) Conseil mentions some common spiny lobsters whose females supply a meat highly prized, slipper lobsters or common shrimp, waterside gebia shrimp, and all sorts of edible species, but he says nothing of the crayfish subdivision that includes the true lobster, because spiny lobsters are the only type in the Mediterranean.

Finally, among the Anomura, he saw common drocina crabs dwelling inside whatever abandoned seashells they could take over, homola crabs with spiny fronts, hermit crabs, hairy porcelain crabs, etc.

There Conseil's work came to a halt.

He didn't have time to finish off the class Crustacea through an examination of its stomatopods, amphipods, homopods, isopods, trilobites, branchiopods, ostracods, and entomostraceans.

And in order to complete his study of marine articulates, he needed to mention the class Cirripedia, which contains water fleas and carp lice, plus the class Annelida, which he would have divided without fail into tubifex worms and dorsibranchian worms.

But having gone past the shallows of the Strait of Sicily, the Nautilus resumed its usual deep-water speed.

From then on, no more mollusks, no more zoophytes, no more articulates.

Just a few large fish sweeping by like shadows.

During the night of February 16-17, we entered the second Mediterranean basin, whose maximum depth we found at 3,000 meters.

The Nautilus, driven downward by its propeller and slanting fins, descended to the lowest strata of this sea.

There, in place of natural wonders, the watery mass offered some thrilling and dreadful scenes to my eyes.

In essence, we were then crossing that part of the whole Mediterranean so fertile in casualties.

From the coast of Algiers to the beaches of Provence, how many ships have wrecked, how many vessels have vanished!

Compared to the vast liquid plains of the Pacific, the Mediterranean is a mere lake, but it's an unpredictable lake with fickle waves, today kindly and affectionate to those frail single-masters drifting between a double ultramarine of sky and water, tomorrow bad-tempered and turbulent, agitated by the winds, demolishing the strongest ships beneath sudden waves that smash down with a headlong wallop.

So, in our swift cruise through these deep strata, how many vessels I saw lying on the seafloor, some already caked with coral, others clad only in a layer of rust, plus anchors, cannons, shells, iron fittings, propeller blades, parts of engines, cracked cylinders, staved-in boilers, then hulls floating in midwater, here upright, there overturned.

Some of these wrecked ships had perished in collisions, others from hitting granite reefs.

I saw a few that had sunk straight down, their masting still upright, their rigging stiffened by the water.

They looked like they were at anchor by some immense, open, offshore mooring where they were waiting for their departure time.

When the Nautilus passed between them, covering them with sheets of electricity, they seemed ready to salute us with their colors and send us their serial numbers!

But no, nothing but silence and death filled this field of catastrophes!

I observed that these Mediterranean depths became more and more cluttered with such gruesome wreckage as the Nautilus drew nearer to the Strait of Gibraltar.

By then the shores of Africa and Europe were converging, and in this narrow space collisions were commonplace.

There I saw numerous iron undersides, the phantasmagoric ruins of steamers, some lying down, others rearing up like fearsome animals.

One of these boats made a dreadful first impression: sides torn open, funnel bent, paddle wheels stripped to the mountings, rudder separated from the sternpost and still hanging from an iron chain, the board on its stern eaten away by marine salts!

How many lives were dashed in this shipwreck!

How many victims were swept under the waves!

Had some sailor on board lived to tell the story of this dreadful disaster, or do the waves still keep this casualty a secret?

It occurred to me, lord knows why, that this boat buried under the sea might have been the Atlas, lost with all hands some twenty years ago and never heard from again!

Oh, what a gruesome tale these Mediterranean depths could tell, this huge boneyard where so much wealth has been lost, where so many victims have met their deaths!

Meanwhile, briskly unconcerned, the Nautilus ran at full propeller through the midst of these ruins.

On February 18, near three o'clock in the morning, it hove before the entrance to the Strait of Gibraltar.

There are two currents here: an upper current, long known to exist, that carries the ocean's waters into the Mediterranean basin; then a lower countercurrent, the only present-day proof of its existence being logic.

In essence, the Mediterranean receives a continual influx of water not only from the Atlantic but from rivers emptying into it; since local evaporation isn't enough to restore the balance, the total amount of added water should make this sea's level higher every year.

Yet this isn't the case, and we're naturally forced to believe in the existence of some lower current that carries the Mediterranean's surplus through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the Atlantic basin.

And so it turned out.

The Nautilus took full advantage of this countercurrent.

It advanced swiftly through this narrow passageway.

For an instant I could glimpse the wonderful ruins of the Temple of Hercules, buried undersea, as Pliny and Avianus have mentioned, together with the flat island they stand on; and a few minutes later, we were floating on the waves of the Atlantic.

The Bay of Vigo THE ATLANTIC!

A vast expanse of water whose surface area is 25,000,000 square miles, with a length of 9,000 miles and an average width of 2,700.

A major sea nearly unknown to the ancients, except perhaps the Carthaginians, those Dutchmen of antiquity who went along the west coasts of Europe and Africa on their commercial junkets!

An ocean whose parallel winding shores form an immense perimeter fed by the world's greatest rivers: the St.

Lawrence, Mississippi, Amazon, Plata, Orinoco, Niger, Senegal, Elbe, Loire, and Rhine, which bring it waters from the most civilized countries as well as the most undeveloped areas!

A magnificent plain of waves plowed continuously by ships of every nation, shaded by every flag in the world, and ending in those two dreadful headlands so feared by navigators, Cape Horn and the Cape of Tempests!

The Nautilus broke these waters with the edge of its spur after doing nearly 10,000 leagues in three and a half months, a track longer than a great circle of the earth.

Where were we heading now, and what did the future have in store for us?

Emerging from the Strait of Gibraltar, the Nautilus took to the high seas.

It returned to the surface of the waves, so our daily strolls on the platform were restored to us.

I climbed onto it instantly, Ned Land and Conseil along with me.

Twelve miles away, Cape St.

Vincent was hazily visible, the southwestern tip of the Hispanic peninsula.

The wind was blowing a pretty strong gust from the south.

The sea was swelling and surging.

Its waves made the Nautilus roll and jerk violently.

It was nearly impossible to stand up on the platform, which was continuously buffeted by this enormously heavy sea.

After inhaling a few breaths of air, we went below once more.

I repaired to my stateroom.

Conseil returned to his cabin; but the Canadian, looking rather worried, followed me.

Our quick trip through the Mediterranean hadn't allowed him to put his plans into execution, and he could barely conceal his disappointment.

After the door to my stateroom was closed, he sat and stared at me silently.

"Ned my friend,"

I told him, "I know how you feel, but you mustn't blame yourself.

Given the way the Nautilus was navigating, it would have been sheer insanity to think of escaping!"

Ned Land didn't reply.

His pursed lips and frowning brow indicated that he was in the grip of his monomania.

"Look here,"

I went on, "as yet there's no cause for despair.

We're going up the coast of Portugal.

France and England aren't far off, and there we'll easily find refuge.

Oh, I grant you, if the Nautilus had emerged from the Strait of Gibraltar and made for that cape in the south, if it were taking us toward those regions that have no continents, then I'd share your alarm.

But we now know that Captain Nemo doesn't avoid the seas of civilization, and in a few days I think we can safely take action."

Ned Land stared at me still more intently and finally unpursed his lips: "We'll do it this evening,"

he said.

I straightened suddenly.

I admit that I was less than ready for this announcement.

I wanted to reply to the Canadian, but words failed me.

"We agreed to wait for the right circumstances,"

Ned Land went on.

"Now we've got those circumstances.

This evening we'll be just a few miles off the coast of Spain.

It'll be cloudy tonight.

The wind's blowing toward shore.

You gave me your promise, Professor Aronnax, and I'm counting on you."

Since I didn't say anything, the Canadian stood up and approached me: "We'll do it this evening at nine o'clock,"

he said.

"I've alerted Conseil.

By that time Captain Nemo will be locked in his room and probably in bed.

Neither the mechanics or the crewmen will be able to see us.

Conseil and I will go to the central companionway.

As for you, Professor Aronnax, you'll stay in the library two steps away and wait for my signal.

The oars, mast, and sail are in the skiff.

I've even managed to stow some provisions inside.

I've gotten hold of a monkey wrench to unscrew the nuts bolting the skiff to the Nautilus's hull.

So everything's ready.

I'll see you this evening."

"The sea is rough,"

I said.

"Admitted,"

the Canadian replied, "but we've got to risk it.

Freedom is worth paying for.

Besides, the longboat's solidly built, and a few miles with the wind behind us is no big deal.

By tomorrow, who knows if this ship won't be 100 leagues out to sea?

If circumstances are in our favor, between ten and eleven this evening we'll be landing on some piece of solid ground, or we'll be dead.

So we're in God's hands, and I'll see you this evening!"

This said, the Canadian withdrew, leaving me close to dumbfounded.

I had imagined that if it came to this, I would have time to think about it, to talk it over.

My stubborn companion hadn't granted me this courtesy.

But after all, what would I have said to him?

Ned Land was right a hundred times over.

These were near-ideal circumstances, and he was taking full advantage of them.

In my selfish personal interests, could I go back on my word and be responsible for ruining the future lives of my companions?

Tomorrow, might not Captain Nemo take us far away from any shore?

Just then a fairly loud hissing told me that the ballast tanks were filling, and the Nautilus sank beneath the waves of the Atlantic.

I stayed in my stateroom.

I wanted to avoid the captain, to hide from his eyes the agitation overwhelming me.

What an agonizing day I spent, torn between my desire to regain my free will and my regret at abandoning this marvelous Nautilus, leaving my underwater research incomplete!

How could I relinquish this ocean--"my own Atlantic,"

as I liked to call it--without observing its lower strata, without wresting from it the kinds of secrets that had been revealed to me by the seas of the East Indies and the Pacific!

I was putting down my novel half read, I was waking up as my dream neared its climax!

How painfully the hours passed, as I sometimes envisioned myself safe on shore with my companions, or, despite my better judgment, as I sometimes wished that some unforeseen circumstances would prevent Ned Land from carrying out his plans.

Twice I went to the lounge.

I wanted to consult the compass.

I wanted to see if the Nautilus's heading was actually taking us closer to the coast or spiriting us farther away.

But no.

The Nautilus was still in Portuguese waters.

Heading north, it was cruising along the ocean's beaches.

So I had to resign myself to my fate and get ready to escape.

My baggage wasn't heavy.

My notes, nothing more.

As for Captain Nemo, I wondered what he would make of our escaping, what concern or perhaps what distress it might cause him, and what he would do in the twofold event of our attempt either failing or being found out!

Certainly I had no complaints to register with him, on the contrary.

Never was hospitality more wholehearted than his.

Yet in leaving him I couldn't be accused of ingratitude.

No solemn promises bound us to him.

In order to keep us captive, he had counted only on the force of circumstances and not on our word of honor.

But his avowed intention to imprison us forever on his ship justified our every effort.

I hadn't seen the captain since our visit to the island of Santorini.

Would fate bring me into his presence before our departure?

I both desired and dreaded it.

I listened for footsteps in the stateroom adjoining mine.

Not a sound reached my ear.

His stateroom had to be deserted.

Then I began to wonder if this eccentric individual was even on board.

Since that night when the skiff had left the Nautilus on some mysterious mission, my ideas about him had subtly changed.

In spite of everything, I thought that Captain Nemo must have kept up some type of relationship with the shore.

Did he himself never leave the Nautilus?

Whole weeks had often gone by without my encountering him.

What was he doing all the while?

During all those times I'd thought he was convalescing in the grip of some misanthropic fit, was he instead far away from the ship, involved in some secret activity whose nature still eluded me?

All these ideas and a thousand others assaulted me at the same time.

In these strange circumstances the scope for conjecture was unlimited.

I felt an unbearable queasiness.

This day of waiting seemed endless.

The hours struck too slowly to keep up with my impatience.

As usual, dinner was served me in my stateroom.

Full of anxiety, I ate little.

I left the table at seven o'clock.

120 minutes-- I was keeping track of them--still separated me from the moment I was to rejoin Ned Land.

My agitation increased.

My pulse was throbbing violently.

I couldn't stand still.

I walked up and down, hoping to calm my troubled mind with movement.

The possibility of perishing in our reckless undertaking was the least of my worries; my heart was pounding at the thought that our plans might be discovered before we had left the Nautilus, at the thought of being hauled in front of Captain Nemo and finding him angered, or worse, saddened by my deserting him.

I wanted to see the lounge one last time.

I went down the gangways and arrived at the museum where I had spent so many pleasant and productive hours.

I stared at all its wealth, all its treasures, like a man on the eve of his eternal exile, a man departing to return no more.

For so many days now, these natural wonders and artistic masterworks had been central to my life, and I was about to leave them behind forever.

I wanted to plunge my eyes through the lounge window and into these Atlantic waters; but the panels were hermetically sealed, and a mantle of sheet iron separated me from this ocean with which I was still unfamiliar.

Crossing through the lounge, I arrived at the door, contrived in one of the canted corners, that opened into the captain's stateroom.

Much to my astonishment, this door was ajar.

I instinctively recoiled.

If Captain Nemo was in his stateroom, he might see me.

But, not hearing any sounds, I approached.

The stateroom was deserted.

I pushed the door open.

I took a few steps inside.

Still the same austere, monastic appearance.

Just then my eye was caught by some etchings hanging on the wall, which I hadn't noticed during my first visit.

They were portraits of great men of history who had spent their lives in perpetual devotion to a great human ideal: Thaddeus Kosciusko, the hero whose dying words had been Finis Poloniae;* Markos Botzaris, for modern Greece the reincarnation of Sparta's King Leonidas; Daniel O'Connell, Ireland's defender; George Washington, founder of the American Union; Daniele Manin, the Italian patriot; Abraham Lincoln, dead from the bullet of a believer in slavery; and finally, that martyr for the redemption of the black race, John Brown, hanging from his gallows as Victor Hugo's pencil has so terrifyingly depicted.

*Latin: "Save Poland's borders."

Ed.

What was the bond between these heroic souls and the soul of Captain Nemo?

From this collection of portraits could I finally unravel the mystery of his existence?

Was he a fighter for oppressed peoples, a liberator of enslaved races?

Had he figured in the recent political or social upheavals of this century?

Was he a hero of that dreadful civil war in America, a war lamentable yet forever glorious .

.

.

?

Suddenly the clock struck eight.

The first stroke of its hammer on the chime snapped me out of my musings.

I shuddered as if some invisible eye had plunged into my innermost thoughts, and I rushed outside the stateroom.

There my eyes fell on the compass.

Our heading was still northerly.

The log indicated a moderate speed, the pressure gauge a depth of about sixty feet.

So circumstances were in favor of the Canadian's plans.

I stayed in my stateroom.

I dressed warmly: fishing boots, otter cap, coat of fan-mussel fabric lined with sealskin.

I was ready.

I was waiting.

Only the propeller's vibrations disturbed the deep silence reigning on board.

I cocked an ear and listened.

Would a sudden outburst of voices tell me that Ned Land's escape plans had just been detected?

A ghastly uneasiness stole through me.

I tried in vain to recover my composure.

A few minutes before nine o'clock, I glued my ear to the captain's door.

Not a sound.

I left my stateroom and returned to the lounge, which was deserted and plunged in near darkness.

I opened the door leading to the library.

The same inadequate light, the same solitude.

I went to man my post near the door opening into the well of the central companionway.

I waited for Ned Land's signal.

At this point the propeller's vibrations slowed down appreciably, then they died out altogether.

Why was the Nautilus stopping?

Whether this layover would help or hinder Ned Land's schemes I couldn't have said.

The silence was further disturbed only by the pounding of my heart.

Suddenly I felt a mild jolt.

I realized the Nautilus had come to rest on the ocean floor.

My alarm increased.

The Canadian's signal hadn't reached me.

I longed to rejoin Ned Land and urge him to postpone his attempt.

I sensed that we were no longer navigating under normal conditions.

Just then the door to the main lounge opened and Captain Nemo appeared.

He saw me, and without further preamble: "Ah, professor,"

he said in an affable tone, "I've been looking for you.

Do you know your Spanish history?"

Even if he knew it by heart, a man in my disturbed, befuddled condition couldn't have quoted a syllable of his own country's history.

"Well?"

Captain Nemo went on.

"Did you hear my question?

Do you know the history of Spain?"

"Very little of it,"

I replied.

"The most learned men,"

the captain said, "still have much to learn.

Have a seat,"

he added, "and I'll tell you about an unusual episode in this body of history."

The captain stretched out on a couch, and I mechanically took a seat near him, but half in the shadows.

"Professor,"

he said, "listen carefully.

This piece of history concerns you in one definite respect, because it will answer a question you've no doubt been unable to resolve."

"I'm listening, captain,"

I said, not knowing what my partner in this dialogue was driving at, and wondering if this incident related to our escape plans.

"Professor,"

Captain Nemo went on, "if you're amenable, we'll go back in time to 1702.

You're aware of the fact that in those days your King Louis XIV thought an imperial gesture would suffice to humble the Pyrenees in the dust, so he inflicted his grandson, the Duke of Anjou, on the Spaniards.

Reigning more or less poorly under the name King Philip V, this aristocrat had to deal with mighty opponents abroad.

"In essence, the year before, the royal houses of Holland, Austria, and England had signed a treaty of alliance at The Hague, aiming to wrest the Spanish crown from King Philip V and to place it on the head of an archduke whom they prematurely dubbed King Charles III.

"Spain had to withstand these allies.

But the country had practically no army or navy.

Yet it wasn't short of money, provided that its galleons, laden with gold and silver from America, could enter its ports.

Now then, late in 1702 Spain was expecting a rich convoy, which France ventured to escort with a fleet of twenty-three vessels under the command of Admiral de Chateau-Renault, because by that time the allied navies were roving the Atlantic.

"This convoy was supposed to put into Cadiz, but after learning that the English fleet lay across those waterways, the admiral decided to make for a French port.

"The Spanish commanders in the convoy objected to this decision.

They wanted to be taken to a Spanish port, if not to Cadiz, then to the Bay of Vigo, located on Spain's northwest coast and not blockaded.

"Admiral de Chateau-Renault was so indecisive as to obey this directive, and the galleons entered the Bay of Vigo.

"Unfortunately this bay forms an open, offshore mooring that's impossible to defend.

So it was essential to hurry and empty the galleons before the allied fleets arrived, and there would have been ample time for this unloading, if a wretched question of trade agreements hadn't suddenly come up.

"Are you clear on the chain of events?"

Captain Nemo asked me.

"Perfectly clear,"

I said, not yet knowing why I was being given this history lesson.

"Then I'll continue.

Here's what came to pass.

The tradesmen of Cadiz had negotiated a charter whereby they were to receive all merchandise coming from the West Indies.

Now then, unloading the ingots from those galleons at the port of Vigo would have been a violation of their rights.

So they lodged a complaint in Madrid, and they obtained an order from the indecisive King Philip V: without unloading, the convoy would stay in custody at the offshore mooring of Vigo until the enemy fleets had retreated.

"Now then, just as this decision was being handed down, English vessels arrived in the Bay of Vigo on October 22, 1702.

Despite his inferior forces, Admiral de Chateau-Renault fought courageously.

But when he saw that the convoy's wealth was about to fall into enemy hands, he burned and scuttled the galleons, which went to the bottom with their immense treasures."

Captain Nemo stopped.

I admit it: I still couldn't see how this piece of history concerned me.

"Well?"

I asked him.

"Well, Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo answered me, "we're actually in that Bay of Vigo, and all that's left is for you to probe the mysteries of the place."

The captain stood up and invited me to follow him.

I'd had time to collect myself.

I did so.

The lounge was dark, but the sea's waves sparkled through the transparent windows.

I stared.

Around the Nautilus for a half-mile radius, the waters seemed saturated with electric light.

The sandy bottom was clear and bright.

Dressed in diving suits, crewmen were busy clearing away half-rotted barrels and disemboweled trunks in the midst of the dingy hulks of ships.

Out of these trunks and kegs spilled ingots of gold and silver, cascades of jewels, pieces of eight.

The sand was heaped with them.

Then, laden with these valuable spoils, the men returned to the Nautilus, dropped off their burdens inside, and went to resume this inexhaustible fishing for silver and gold.

I understood.

This was the setting of that battle on October 22, 1702.

Here, in this very place, those galleons carrying treasure to the Spanish government had gone to the bottom.

Here, whenever he needed, Captain Nemo came to withdraw these millions to ballast his Nautilus.

It was for him, for him alone, that America had yielded up its precious metals.

He was the direct, sole heir to these treasures wrested from the Incas and those peoples conquered by Hernando Cortez!

"Did you know, professor,"

he asked me with a smile, "that the sea contained such wealth?"

"I know it's estimated,"

I replied, "that there are 2,000,000 metric tons of silver held in suspension in seawater."

"Surely, but in extracting that silver, your expenses would outweigh your profits.

Here, by contrast, I have only to pick up what other men have lost, and not only in this Bay of Vigo but at a thousand other sites where ships have gone down, whose positions are marked on my underwater chart.

Do you understand now that I'm rich to the tune of billions?"

"I understand, captain.

Nevertheless, allow me to inform you that by harvesting this very Bay of Vigo, you're simply forestalling the efforts of a rival organization."

"What organization?"

"A company chartered by the Spanish government to search for these sunken galleons.

The company's investors were lured by the bait of enormous gains, because this scuttled treasure is estimated to be worth 500,000,000 francs."

"It was 500,000,000 francs,"

Captain Nemo replied, "but no more!"

"Right,"

I said.

"Hence a timely warning to those investors would be an act of charity.

Yet who knows if it would be well received?

Usually what gamblers regret the most isn't the loss of their money so much as the loss of their insane hopes.

But ultimately I feel less sorry for them than for the thousands of unfortunate people who would have benefited from a fair distribution of this wealth, whereas now it will be of no help to them!"

No sooner had I voiced this regret than I felt it must have wounded Captain Nemo.

"No help!"

he replied with growing animation.

"Sir, what makes you assume this wealth goes to waste when I'm the one amassing it?

Do you think I toil to gather this treasure out of selfishness?

Who says I don't put it to good use?

Do you think I'm unaware of the suffering beings and oppressed races living on this earth, poor people to comfort, victims to avenge?

Don't you understand .

.

.

?"

Captain Nemo stopped on these last words, perhaps sorry that he had said too much.

But I had guessed.

Whatever motives had driven him to seek independence under the seas, he remained a human being before all else!

His heart still throbbed for suffering humanity, and his immense philanthropy went out both to downtrodden races and to individuals!

And now I knew where Captain Nemo had delivered those millions, when the Nautilus navigated the waters where Crete was in rebellion against the Ottoman Empire!

A Lost Continent THE NEXT MORNING, February 19, I beheld the Canadian entering my stateroom.

I was expecting this visit.

He wore an expression of great disappointment.

"Well, sir?"

he said to me.

"Well, Ned, the fates were against us yesterday."

"Yes!

That damned captain had to call a halt just as we were going to escape from his boat."

"Yes, Ned, he had business with his bankers."

"His bankers?"

"Or rather his bank vaults.

By which I mean this ocean, where his wealth is safer than in any national treasury."

I then related the evening's incidents to the Canadian, secretly hoping he would come around to the idea of not deserting the captain; but my narrative had no result other than Ned's voicing deep regret that he hadn't strolled across the Vigo battlefield on his own behalf.

"Anyhow,"

he said, "it's not over yet!

My first harpoon missed, that's all!

We'll succeed the next time, and as soon as this evening, if need be .

.

."

"What's the Nautilus's heading?"

I asked.

"I've no idea,"

Ned replied.

"All right, at noon we'll find out what our position is!"

The Canadian returned to Conseil's side.

As soon as I was dressed, I went into the lounge.

The compass wasn't encouraging.

The Nautilus's course was south-southwest.

We were turning our backs on Europe.

I could hardly wait until our position was reported on the chart.

Near 11:30 the ballast tanks emptied, and the submersible rose to the surface of the ocean.

I leaped onto the platform.

Ned Land was already there.

No more shore in sight.

Nothing but the immenseness of the sea.

A few sails were on the horizon, no doubt ships going as far as Cape So Roque to find favorable winds for doubling the Cape of Good Hope.

The sky was overcast.

A squall was on the way.

Furious, Ned tried to see through the mists on the horizon.

He still hoped that behind all that fog there lay those shores he longed for.

At noon the sun made a momentary appearance.

Taking advantage of this rift in the clouds, the chief officer took the orb's altitude.

Then the sea grew turbulent, we went below again, and the hatch closed once more.

When I consulted the chart an hour later, I saw that the Nautilus's position was marked at longitude 16 degrees 17' and latitude 33 degrees 22', a good 150 leagues from the nearest coast.

It wouldn't do to even dream of escaping, and I'll let the reader decide how promptly the Canadian threw a tantrum when I ventured to tell him our situation.

As for me, I wasn't exactly grief-stricken.

I felt as if a heavy weight had been lifted from me, and I was able to resume my regular tasks in a state of comparative calm.

Near eleven o'clock in the evening, I received a most unexpected visit from Captain Nemo.

He asked me very graciously if I felt exhausted from our vigil the night before.

I said no.

"Then, Professor Aronnax, I propose an unusual excursion."

"Propose away, captain."

"So far you've visited the ocean depths only by day and under sunlight.

Would you like to see these depths on a dark night?"

"Very much."

"I warn you, this will be an exhausting stroll.

We'll need to walk long hours and scale a mountain.

The roads aren't terribly well kept up."

"Everything you say, captain, just increases my curiosity.

I'm ready to go with you."

"Then come along, professor, and we'll go put on our diving suits."

Arriving at the wardrobe, I saw that neither my companions nor any crewmen would be coming with us on this excursion.

Captain Nemo hadn't even suggested my fetching Ned or Conseil.

In a few moments we had put on our equipment.

Air tanks, abundantly charged, were placed on our backs, but the electric lamps were not in readiness.

I commented on this to the captain.

"They'll be useless to us,"

he replied.

I thought I hadn't heard him right, but I couldn't repeat my comment because the captain's head had already disappeared into its metal covering.

I finished harnessing myself, I felt an alpenstock being placed in my hand, and a few minutes later, after the usual procedures, we set foot on the floor of the Atlantic, 300 meters down.

Midnight was approaching.

The waters were profoundly dark, but Captain Nemo pointed to a reddish spot in the distance, a sort of wide glow shimmering about two miles from the Nautilus.

What this fire was, what substances fed it, how and why it kept burning in the liquid mass, I couldn't say.

Anyhow it lit our way, although hazily, but I soon grew accustomed to this unique gloom, and in these circumstances I understood the uselessness of the Ruhmkorff device.

Side by side, Captain Nemo and I walked directly toward this conspicuous flame.

The level seafloor rose imperceptibly.

We took long strides, helped by our alpenstocks; but in general our progress was slow, because our feet kept sinking into a kind of slimy mud mixed with seaweed and assorted flat stones.

As we moved forward, I heard a kind of pitter-patter above my head.

Sometimes this noise increased and became a continuous crackle.

I soon realized the cause.

It was a heavy rainfall rattling on the surface of the waves.

Instinctively I worried that I might get soaked!

By water in the midst of water!

I couldn't help smiling at this outlandish notion.

But to tell the truth, wearing these heavy diving suits, you no longer feel the liquid element, you simply think you're in the midst of air a little denser than air on land, that's all.

After half an hour of walking, the seafloor grew rocky.

Jellyfish, microscopic crustaceans, and sea-pen coral lit it faintly with their phosphorescent glimmers.

I glimpsed piles of stones covered by a couple million zoophytes and tangles of algae.

My feet often slipped on this viscous seaweed carpet, and without my alpenstock I would have fallen more than once.

When I turned around, I could still see the Nautilus's whitish beacon, which was starting to grow pale in the distance.

Those piles of stones just mentioned were laid out on the ocean floor with a distinct but inexplicable symmetry.

I spotted gigantic furrows trailing off into the distant darkness, their length incalculable.

There also were other peculiarities I couldn't make sense of.

It seemed to me that my heavy lead soles were crushing a litter of bones that made a dry crackling noise.

So what were these vast plains we were now crossing?

I wanted to ask the captain, but I still didn't grasp that sign language that allowed him to chat with his companions when they went with him on his underwater excursions.

Meanwhile the reddish light guiding us had expanded and inflamed the horizon.

The presence of this furnace under the waters had me extremely puzzled.

Was it some sort of electrical discharge?

Was I approaching some natural phenomenon still unknown to scientists on shore?

Or, rather (and this thought did cross my mind), had the hand of man intervened in that blaze?

Had human beings fanned those flames?

In these deep strata would I meet up with more of Captain Nemo's companions, friends he was about to visit who led lives as strange as his own?

Would I find a whole colony of exiles down here, men tired of the world's woes, men who had sought and found independence in the ocean's lower depths?

All these insane, inadmissible ideas dogged me, and in this frame of mind, continually excited by the series of wonders passing before my eyes, I wouldn't have been surprised to find on this sea bottom one of those underwater towns Captain Nemo dreamed about!

Our path was getting brighter and brighter.

The red glow had turned white and was radiating from a mountain peak about 800 feet high.

But what I saw was simply a reflection produced by the crystal waters of these strata.

The furnace that was the source of this inexplicable light occupied the far side of the mountain.

In the midst of the stone mazes furrowing this Atlantic seafloor, Captain Nemo moved forward without hesitation.

He knew this dark path.

No doubt he had often traveled it and was incapable of losing his way.

I followed him with unshakeable confidence.

He seemed like some Spirit of the Sea, and as he walked ahead of me, I marveled at his tall figure, which stood out in black against the glowing background of the horizon.

It was one o'clock in the morning.

We arrived at the mountain's lower gradients.

But in grappling with them, we had to venture up difficult trails through a huge thicket.

Yes, a thicket of dead trees!

Trees without leaves, without sap, turned to stone by the action of the waters, and crowned here and there by gigantic pines.

It was like a still-erect coalfield, its roots clutching broken soil, its boughs clearly outlined against the ceiling of the waters like thin, black, paper cutouts.

Picture a forest clinging to the sides of a peak in the Harz Mountains, but a submerged forest.

The trails were cluttered with algae and fucus plants, hosts of crustaceans swarming among them.

I plunged on, scaling rocks, straddling fallen tree trunks, snapping marine creepers that swayed from one tree to another, startling the fish that flitted from branch to branch.

Carried away, I didn't feel exhausted any more.

I followed a guide who was immune to exhaustion.

What a sight!

How can I describe it!

How can I portray these woods and rocks in this liquid setting, their lower parts dark and sullen, their upper parts tinted red in this light whose intensity was doubled by the reflecting power of the waters!

We scaled rocks that crumbled behind us, collapsing in enormous sections with the hollow rumble of an avalanche.

To our right and left there were carved gloomy galleries where the eye lost its way.

Huge glades opened up, seemingly cleared by the hand of man, and I sometimes wondered whether some residents of these underwater regions would suddenly appear before me.

But Captain Nemo kept climbing.

I didn't want to fall behind.

I followed him boldly.

My alpenstock was a great help.

One wrong step would have been disastrous on the narrow paths cut into the sides of these chasms, but I walked along with a firm tread and without the slightest feeling of dizziness.

Sometimes I leaped over a crevasse whose depth would have made me recoil had I been in the midst of glaciers on shore; sometimes I ventured out on a wobbling tree trunk fallen across a gorge, without looking down, having eyes only for marveling at the wild scenery of this region.

There, leaning on erratically cut foundations, monumental rocks seemed to defy the laws of balance.

From between their stony knees, trees sprang up like jets under fearsome pressure, supporting other trees that supported them in turn.

Next, natural towers with wide, steeply carved battlements leaned at angles that, on dry land, the laws of gravity would never have authorized.

And I too could feel the difference created by the water's powerful density--despite my heavy clothing, copper headpiece, and metal soles, I climbed the most impossibly steep gradients with all the nimbleness, I swear it, of a chamois or a Pyrenees mountain goat!

As for my account of this excursion under the waters, I'm well aware that it sounds incredible!

I'm the chronicler of deeds seemingly impossible and yet incontestably real.

This was no fantasy.

This was what I saw and felt!

Two hours after leaving the Nautilus, we had cleared the timberline, and 100 feet above our heads stood the mountain peak, forming a dark silhouette against the brilliant glare that came from its far slope.

Petrified shrubs rambled here and there in sprawling zigzags.

Fish rose in a body at our feet like birds startled in tall grass.

The rocky mass was gouged with impenetrable crevices, deep caves, unfathomable holes at whose far ends I could hear fearsome things moving around.

My blood would curdle as I watched some enormous antenna bar my path, or saw some frightful pincer snap shut in the shadow of some cavity!

A thousand specks of light glittered in the midst of the gloom.

They were the eyes of gigantic crustaceans crouching in their lairs, giant lobsters rearing up like spear carriers and moving their claws with a scrap-iron clanking, titanic crabs aiming their bodies like cannons on their carriages, and hideous devilfish intertwining their tentacles like bushes of writhing snakes.

What was this astounding world that I didn't yet know?

In what order did these articulates belong, these creatures for which the rocks provided a second carapace?

Where had nature learned the secret of their vegetating existence, and for how many centuries had they lived in the ocean's lower strata?

But I couldn't linger.

Captain Nemo, on familiar terms with these dreadful animals, no longer minded them.

We arrived at a preliminary plateau where still other surprises were waiting for me.

There picturesque ruins took shape, betraying the hand of man, not our Creator.

They were huge stacks of stones in which you could distinguish the indistinct forms of palaces and temples, now arrayed in hosts of blossoming zoophytes, and over it all, not ivy but a heavy mantle of algae and fucus plants.

But what part of the globe could this be, this land swallowed by cataclysms?

Who had set up these rocks and stones like the dolmens of prehistoric times?

Where was I, where had Captain Nemo's fancies taken me?

I wanted to ask him.

Unable to, I stopped him.

I seized his arm.

But he shook his head, pointed to the mountain's topmost peak, and seemed to tell me: "Come on!

Come with me!

Come higher!"

I followed him with one last burst of energy, and in a few minutes I had scaled the peak, which crowned the whole rocky mass by some ten meters.

I looked back down the side we had just cleared.

There the mountain rose only 700 to 800 feet above the plains; but on its far slope it crowned the receding bottom of this part of the Atlantic by a height twice that.

My eyes scanned the distance and took in a vast area lit by intense flashes of light.

In essence, this mountain was a volcano.

Fifty feet below its peak, amid a shower of stones and slag, a wide crater vomited torrents of lava that were dispersed in fiery cascades into the heart of the liquid mass.

So situated, this volcano was an immense torch that lit up the lower plains all the way to the horizon.

As I said, this underwater crater spewed lava, but not flames.

Flames need oxygen from the air and are unable to spread underwater; but a lava flow, which contains in itself the principle of its incandescence, can rise to a white heat, overpower the liquid element, and turn it into steam on contact.

Swift currents swept away all this diffuse gas, and torrents of lava slid to the foot of the mountain, like the disgorgings of a Mt.

Vesuvius over the city limits of a second Torre del Greco.

In fact, there beneath my eyes was a town in ruins, demolished, overwhelmed, laid low, its roofs caved in, its temples pulled down, its arches dislocated, its columns stretching over the earth; in these ruins you could still detect the solid proportions of a sort of Tuscan architecture; farther off, the remains of a gigantic aqueduct; here, the caked heights of an acropolis along with the fluid forms of a Parthenon; there, the remnants of a wharf, as if some bygone port had long ago harbored merchant vessels and triple-tiered war galleys on the shores of some lost ocean; still farther off, long rows of collapsing walls, deserted thoroughfares, a whole Pompeii buried under the waters, which Captain Nemo had resurrected before my eyes!

Where was I?

Where was I?

I had to find out at all cost, I wanted to speak, I wanted to rip off the copper sphere imprisoning my head.

But Captain Nemo came over and stopped me with a gesture.

Then, picking up a piece of chalky stone, he advanced to a black basaltic rock and scrawled this one word: ATLANTIS What lightning flashed through my mind!

Atlantis, that ancient land of Meropis mentioned by the historian Theopompus; Plato's Atlantis; the continent whose very existence has been denied by such philosophers and scientists as Origen, Porphyry, Iamblichus, d'Anville, Malte-Brun, and Humboldt, who entered its disappearance in the ledger of myths and folk tales; the country whose reality has nevertheless been accepted by such other thinkers as Posidonius, Pliny, Ammianus Marcellinus, Tertullian, Engel, Scherer, Tournefort, Buffon, and d'Avezac; I had this land right under my eyes, furnishing its own unimpeachable evidence of the catastrophe that had overtaken it!

So this was the submerged region that had existed outside Europe, Asia, and Libya, beyond the Pillars of Hercules, home of those powerful Atlantean people against whom ancient Greece had waged its earliest wars!

The writer whose narratives record the lofty deeds of those heroic times is Plato himself.

His dialogues Timaeus and Critias were drafted with the poet and legislator Solon as their inspiration, as it were.

One day Solon was conversing with some elderly wise men in the Egyptian capital of Sais, a town already 8,000 years of age, as documented by the annals engraved on the sacred walls of its temples.

One of these elders related the history of another town 1,000 years older still.

This original city of Athens, ninety centuries old, had been invaded and partly destroyed by the Atlanteans.

These Atlanteans, he said, resided on an immense continent greater than Africa and Asia combined, taking in an area that lay between latitude 12 degrees and 40 degrees north.

Their dominion extended even to Egypt.

They tried to enforce their rule as far as Greece, but they had to retreat before the indomitable resistance of the Hellenic people.

Centuries passed.

A cataclysm occurred--floods, earthquakes.

A single night and day were enough to obliterate this Atlantis, whose highest peaks (Madeira, the Azores, the Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands) still emerge above the waves.

These were the historical memories that Captain Nemo's scrawl sent rushing through my mind.

Thus, led by the strangest of fates, I was treading underfoot one of the mountains of that continent!

My hands were touching ruins many thousands of years old, contemporary with prehistoric times!

I was walking in the very place where contemporaries of early man had walked!

My heavy soles were crushing the skeletons of animals from the age of fable, animals that used to take cover in the shade of these trees now turned to stone!

Oh, why was I so short of time!

I would have gone down the steep slopes of this mountain, crossed this entire immense continent, which surely connects Africa with America, and visited its great prehistoric cities.

Under my eyes there perhaps lay the warlike town of Makhimos or the pious village of Eusebes, whose gigantic inhabitants lived for whole centuries and had the strength to raise blocks of stone that still withstood the action of the waters.

One day perhaps, some volcanic phenomenon will bring these sunken ruins back to the surface of the waves!

Numerous underwater volcanoes have been sighted in this part of the ocean, and many ships have felt terrific tremors when passing over these turbulent depths.

A few have heard hollow noises that announced some struggle of the elements far below, others have hauled in volcanic ash hurled above the waves.

As far as the equator this whole seafloor is still under construction by plutonic forces.

And in some remote epoch, built up by volcanic disgorgings and successive layers of lava, who knows whether the peaks of these fire-belching mountains may reappear above the surface of the Atlantic!

As I mused in this way, trying to establish in my memory every detail of this impressive landscape, Captain Nemo was leaning his elbows on a moss-covered monument, motionless as if petrified in some mute trance.

Was he dreaming of those lost generations, asking them for the secret of human destiny?

Was it here that this strange man came to revive himself, basking in historical memories, reliving that bygone life, he who had no desire for our modern one?

I would have given anything to know his thoughts, to share them, understand them!

We stayed in this place an entire hour, contemplating its vast plains in the lava's glow, which sometimes took on a startling intensity.

Inner boilings sent quick shivers running through the mountain's crust.

Noises from deep underneath, clearly transmitted by the liquid medium, reverberated with majestic amplitude.

Just then the moon appeared for an instant through the watery mass, casting a few pale rays over this submerged continent.

It was only a fleeting glimmer, but its effect was indescribable.

The captain stood up and took one last look at these immense plains; then his hand signaled me to follow him.

We went swiftly down the mountain.

Once past the petrified forest, I could see the Nautilus's beacon twinkling like a star.

The captain walked straight toward it, and we were back on board just as the first glimmers of dawn were whitening the surface of the ocean.

The Underwater Coalfields THE NEXT DAY, February 20, I overslept.

I was so exhausted from the night before, I didn't get up until eleven o'clock.

I dressed quickly.

I hurried to find out the Nautilus's heading.

The instruments indicated that it was running southward at a speed of twenty miles per hour and a depth of 100 meters.

Conseil entered.

I described our nocturnal excursion to him, and since the panels were open, he could still catch a glimpse of this submerged continent.

In fact, the Nautilus was skimming only ten meters over the soil of these Atlantis plains.

The ship scudded along like an air balloon borne by the wind over some prairie on land; but it would be more accurate to say that we sat in the lounge as if we were riding in a coach on an express train.

As for the foregrounds passing before our eyes, they were fantastically carved rocks, forests of trees that had crossed over from the vegetable kingdom into the mineral kingdom, their motionless silhouettes sprawling beneath the waves.

There also were stony masses buried beneath carpets of axidia and sea anemone, bristling with long, vertical water plants, then strangely contoured blocks of lava that testified to all the fury of those plutonic developments.

While this bizarre scenery was glittering under our electric beams, I told Conseil the story of the Atlanteans, who had inspired the old French scientist Jean Bailly to write so many entertaining-- albeit utterly fictitious--pages.* I told the lad about the wars of these heroic people.

I discussed the question of Atlantis with the fervor of a man who no longer had any doubts.

But Conseil was so distracted he barely heard me, and his lack of interest in any commentary on this historical topic was soon explained.

*Bailly believed that Atlantis was located at the North Pole!

Ed.

In essence, numerous fish had caught his eye, and when fish pass by, Conseil vanishes into his world of classifying and leaves real life behind.

In which case I could only tag along and resume our ichthyological research.

Even so, these Atlantic fish were not noticeably different from those we had observed earlier.

There were rays of gigantic size, five meters long and with muscles so powerful they could leap above the waves, sharks of various species including a fifteen-foot glaucous shark with sharp triangular teeth and so transparent it was almost invisible amid the waters, brown lantern sharks, prism-shaped humantin sharks armored with protuberant hides, sturgeons resembling their relatives in the Mediterranean, trumpet-snouted pipefish a foot and a half long, yellowish brown with small gray fins and no teeth or tongue, unreeling like slim, supple snakes.

Among bony fish, Conseil noticed some blackish marlin three meters long with a sharp sword jutting from the upper jaw, bright-colored weevers known in Aristotle's day as sea dragons and whose dorsal stingers make them quite dangerous to pick up, then dolphinfish with brown backs striped in blue and edged in gold, handsome dorados, moonlike opahs that look like azure disks but which the sun's rays turn into spots of silver, finally eight-meter swordfish from the genus Xiphias, swimming in schools, sporting yellowish sickle-shaped fins and six-foot broadswords, stalwart animals, plant eaters rather than fish eaters, obeying the tiniest signals from their females like henpecked husbands.

But while observing these different specimens of marine fauna, I didn't stop examining the long plains of Atlantis.

Sometimes an unpredictable irregularity in the seafloor would force the Nautilus to slow down, and then it would glide into the narrow channels between the hills with a cetacean's dexterity.

If the labyrinth became hopelessly tangled, the submersible would rise above it like an airship, and after clearing the obstacle, it would resume its speedy course just a few meters above the ocean floor.

It was an enjoyable and impressive way of navigating that did indeed recall the maneuvers of an airship ride, with the major difference that the Nautilus faithfully obeyed the hands of its helmsman.

The terrain consisted mostly of thick slime mixed with petrified branches, but it changed little by little near four o'clock in the afternoon; it grew rockier and seemed to be strewn with pudding stones and a basaltic gravel called "tuff,"

together with bits of lava and sulfurous obsidian.

I expected these long plains to change into mountain regions, and in fact, as the Nautilus was executing certain turns, I noticed that the southerly horizon was blocked by a high wall that seemed to close off every exit.

Its summit obviously poked above the level of the ocean.

It had to be a continent or at least an island, either one of the Canaries or one of the Cape Verde Islands.

Our bearings hadn't been marked on the chart-- perhaps deliberately--and I had no idea what our position was.

In any case this wall seemed to signal the end of Atlantis, of which, all in all, we had crossed only a small part.

Nightfall didn't interrupt my observations.

I was left to myself.

Conseil had repaired to his cabin.

The Nautilus slowed down, hovering above the muddled masses on the seafloor, sometimes grazing them as if wanting to come to rest, sometimes rising unpredictably to the surface of the waves.

Then I glimpsed a few bright constellations through the crystal waters, specifically five or six of those zodiacal stars trailing from the tail end of Orion.

I would have stayed longer at my window, marveling at these beauties of sea and sky, but the panels closed.

Just then the Nautilus had arrived at the perpendicular face of that high wall.

How the ship would maneuver I hadn't a guess.

I repaired to my stateroom.

The Nautilus did not stir.

I fell asleep with the firm intention of waking up in just a few hours.

But it was eight o'clock the next day when I returned to the lounge.

I stared at the pressure gauge.

It told me that the Nautilus was afloat on the surface of the ocean.

Furthermore, I heard the sound of footsteps on the platform.

Yet there were no rolling movements to indicate the presence of waves undulating above me.

I climbed as far as the hatch.

It was open.

But instead of the broad daylight I was expecting, I found that I was surrounded by total darkness.

Where were we?

Had I been mistaken?

Was it still night?

No!

Not one star was twinkling, and nighttime is never so utterly black.

I wasn't sure what to think, when a voice said to me: "Is that you, professor?"

"Ah, Captain Nemo!"

I replied.

"Where are we?"

"Underground, professor."

"Underground!"

I exclaimed.

"And the Nautilus is still floating?"

"It always floats."

"But I don't understand!"

"Wait a little while.

Our beacon is about to go on, and if you want some light on the subject, you'll be satisfied."

I set foot on the platform and waited.

The darkness was so profound I couldn't see even Captain Nemo.

However, looking at the zenith directly overhead, I thought I caught sight of a feeble glimmer, a sort of twilight filtering through a circular hole.

Just then the beacon suddenly went on, and its intense brightness made that hazy light vanish.

This stream of electricity dazzled my eyes, and after momentarily shutting them, I looked around.

The Nautilus was stationary.

It was floating next to an embankment shaped like a wharf.

As for the water now buoying the ship, it was a lake completely encircled by an inner wall about two miles in diameter, hence six miles around.

Its level--as indicated by the pressure gauge--would be the same as the outside level, because some connection had to exist between this lake and the sea.

Slanting inward over their base, these high walls converged to form a vault shaped like an immense upside-down funnel that measured 500 or 600 meters in height.

At its summit there gaped the circular opening through which I had detected that faint glimmer, obviously daylight.

Before more carefully examining the interior features of this enormous cavern, and before deciding if it was the work of nature or humankind, I went over to Captain Nemo.

"Where are we?"

I said.

"In the very heart of an extinct volcano,"

the captain answered me, "a volcano whose interior was invaded by the sea after some convulsion in the earth.

While you were sleeping, professor, the Nautilus entered this lagoon through a natural channel that opens ten meters below the surface of the ocean.

This is our home port, secure, convenient, secret, and sheltered against winds from any direction!

Along the coasts of your continents or islands, show me any offshore mooring that can equal this safe refuge for withstanding the fury of hurricanes."

"Indeed,"

I replied, "here you're in perfect safety, Captain Nemo.

Who could reach you in the heart of a volcano?

But don't I see an opening at its summit?"

"Yes, its crater, a crater formerly filled with lava, steam, and flames, but which now lets in this life-giving air we're breathing."

"But which volcanic mountain is this?"

I asked.

"It's one of the many islets with which this sea is strewn.

For ships a mere reef, for us an immense cavern.

I discovered it by chance, and chance served me well."

"But couldn't someone enter through the mouth of its crater?"

"No more than I could exit through it.

You can climb about 100 feet up the inner base of this mountain, but then the walls overhang, they lean too far in to be scaled."

"I can see, captain, that nature is your obedient servant, any time or any place.

You're safe on this lake, and nobody else can visit its waters.

But what's the purpose of this refuge?

The Nautilus doesn't need a harbor."

"No, professor, but it needs electricity to run, batteries to generate its electricity, sodium to feed its batteries, coal to make its sodium, and coalfields from which to dig its coal.

Now then, right at this spot the sea covers entire forests that sank underwater in prehistoric times; today, turned to stone, transformed into carbon fuel, they offer me inexhaustible coal mines."

"So, captain, your men practice the trade of miners here?"

"Precisely.

These mines extend under the waves like the coalfields at Newcastle.

Here, dressed in diving suits, pick and mattock in hand, my men go out and dig this carbon fuel for which I don't need a single mine on land.

When I burn this combustible to produce sodium, the smoke escaping from the mountain's crater gives it the appearance of a still-active volcano."

"And will we see your companions at work?"

"No, at least not this time, because I'm eager to continue our underwater tour of the world.

Accordingly, I'll rest content with drawing on my reserve stock of sodium.

We'll stay here long enough to load it on board, in other words, a single workday, then we'll resume our voyage.

So, Professor Aronnax, if you'd like to explore this cavern and circle its lagoon, seize the day."

I thanked the captain and went to look for my two companions, who hadn't yet left their cabin.

I invited them to follow me, not telling them where we were.

They climbed onto the platform.

Conseil, whom nothing could startle, saw it as a perfectly natural thing to fall asleep under the waves and wake up under a mountain.

But Ned Land had no idea in his head other than to see if this cavern offered some way out.

After breakfast near ten o'clock, we went down onto the embankment.

"So here we are, back on shore,"

Conseil said.

"I'd hardly call this shore,"

the Canadian replied.

"And besides, we aren't on it but under it."

A sandy beach unfolded before us, measuring 500 feet at its widest point between the waters of the lake and the foot of the mountain's walls.

Via this strand you could easily circle the lake.

But the base of these high walls consisted of broken soil over which there lay picturesque piles of volcanic blocks and enormous pumice stones.

All these crumbling masses were covered with an enamel polished by the action of underground fires, and they glistened under the stream of electric light from our beacon.

Stirred up by our footsteps, the mica-rich dust on this beach flew into the air like a cloud of sparks.

The ground rose appreciably as it moved away from the sand flats by the waves, and we soon arrived at some long, winding gradients, genuinely steep paths that allowed us to climb little by little; but we had to tread cautiously in the midst of pudding stones that weren't cemented together, and our feet kept skidding on glassy trachyte, made of feldspar and quartz crystals.

The volcanic nature of this enormous pit was apparent all around us.

I ventured to comment on it to my companions.

"Can you picture,"

I asked them, "what this funnel must have been like when it was filled with boiling lava, and the level of that incandescent liquid rose right to the mountain's mouth, like cast iron up the insides of a furnace?"

"I can picture it perfectly,"

Conseil replied.

"But will master tell me why this huge smelter suspended operations, and how it is that an oven was replaced by the tranquil waters of a lake?"

"In all likelihood, Conseil, because some convulsion created an opening below the surface of the ocean, the opening that serves as a passageway for the Nautilus.

Then the waters of the Atlantic rushed inside the mountain.

There ensued a dreadful struggle between the elements of fire and water, a struggle ending in King Neptune's favor.

But many centuries have passed since then, and this submerged volcano has changed into a peaceful cavern."

"That's fine,"

Ned Land answered.

"I accept the explanation, but in our personal interests, I'm sorry this opening the professor mentions wasn't made above sea level."

"But Ned my friend,"

Conseil answered, "if it weren't an underwater passageway, the Nautilus couldn't enter it!"

"And I might add, Mr.

Land,"

I said, "that the waters wouldn't have rushed under the mountain, and the volcano would still be a volcano.

So you have nothing to be sorry about."

Our climb continued.

The gradients got steeper and narrower.

Sometimes they were cut across by deep pits that had to be cleared.

Masses of overhanging rock had to be gotten around.

You slid on your knees, you crept on your belly.

But helped by the Canadian's strength and Conseil's dexterity, we overcame every obstacle.

At an elevation of about thirty meters, the nature of the terrain changed without becoming any easier.

Pudding stones and trachyte gave way to black basaltic rock: here, lying in slabs all swollen with blisters; there, shaped like actual prisms and arranged into a series of columns that supported the springings of this immense vault, a wonderful sample of natural architecture.

Then, among this basaltic rock, there snaked long, hardened lava flows inlaid with veins of bituminous coal and in places covered by wide carpets of sulfur.

The sunshine coming through the crater had grown stronger, shedding a hazy light over all the volcanic waste forever buried in the heart of this extinct mountain.

But when we had ascended to an elevation of about 250 feet, we were stopped by insurmountable obstacles.

The converging inside walls changed into overhangs, and our climb into a circular stroll.

At this topmost level the vegetable kingdom began to challenge the mineral kingdom.

Shrubs, and even a few trees, emerged from crevices in the walls.

I recognized some spurges that let their caustic, purgative sap trickle out.

There were heliotropes, very remiss at living up to their sun-worshipping reputations since no sunlight ever reached them; their clusters of flowers drooped sadly, their colors and scents were faded.

Here and there chrysanthemums sprouted timidly at the feet of aloes with long, sad, sickly leaves.

But between these lava flows I spotted little violets that still gave off a subtle fragrance, and I confess that I inhaled it with delight.

The soul of a flower is its scent, and those splendid water plants, flowers of the sea, have no souls!

We had arrived at the foot of a sturdy clump of dragon trees, which were splitting the rocks with exertions of their muscular roots, when Ned Land exclaimed: "Oh, sir, a hive!"

"A hive?"

I answered, with a gesture of utter disbelief.

"Yes, a hive,"

the Canadian repeated, "with bees buzzing around!"

I went closer and was forced to recognize the obvious.

At the mouth of a hole cut in the trunk of a dragon tree, there swarmed thousands of these ingenious insects so common to all the Canary Islands, where their output is especially prized.

Naturally enough, the Canadian wanted to lay in a supply of honey, and it would have been ill-mannered of me to say no.

He mixed sulfur with some dry leaves, set them on fire with a spark from his tinderbox, and proceeded to smoke the bees out.

Little by little the buzzing died down and the disemboweled hive yielded several pounds of sweet honey.

Ned Land stuffed his haversack with it.

"When I've mixed this honey with our breadfruit batter,"

he told us, "I'll be ready to serve you a delectable piece of cake."

"But of course,"

Conseil put in, "it will be gingerbread!"

"I'm all for gingerbread,"

I said, "but let's resume this fascinating stroll."

At certain turns in the trail we were going along, the lake appeared in its full expanse.

The ship's beacon lit up that whole placid surface, which experienced neither ripples nor undulations.

The Nautilus lay perfectly still.

On its platform and on the embankment, crewmen were bustling around, black shadows that stood out clearly in the midst of the luminous air.

Just then we went around the highest ridge of these rocky foothills that supported the vault.

Then I saw that bees weren't the animal kingdom's only representatives inside this volcano.

Here and in the shadows, birds of prey soared and whirled, flying away from nests perched on tips of rock.

There were sparrow hawks with white bellies, and screeching kestrels.

With all the speed their stiltlike legs could muster, fine fat bustards scampered over the slopes.

I'll let the reader decide whether the Canadian's appetite was aroused by the sight of this tasty game, and whether he regretted having no rifle in his hands.

He tried to make stones do the work of bullets, and after several fruitless attempts, he managed to wound one of these magnificent bustards.

To say he risked his life twenty times in order to capture this bird is simply the unadulterated truth; but he fared so well, the animal went into his sack to join the honeycombs.

By then we were forced to go back down to the beach because the ridge had become impossible.

Above us, the yawning crater looked like the wide mouth of a well.

From where we stood, the sky was pretty easy to see, and I watched clouds race by, disheveled by the west wind, letting tatters of mist trail over the mountain's summit.

Proof positive that those clouds kept at a moderate altitude, because this volcano didn't rise more than 1,800 feet above the level of the ocean.

Half an hour after the Canadian's latest exploits, we were back on the inner beach.

There the local flora was represented by a wide carpet of samphire, a small umbelliferous plant that keeps quite nicely, which also boasts the names glasswort, saxifrage, and sea fennel.

Conseil picked a couple bunches.

As for the local fauna, it included thousands of crustaceans of every type: lobsters, hermit crabs, prawns, mysid shrimps, daddy longlegs, rock crabs, and a prodigious number of seashells, such as cowries, murex snails, and limpets.

In this locality there gaped the mouth of a magnificent cave.

My companions and I took great pleasure in stretching out on its fine-grained sand.

Fire had polished the sparkling enamel of its inner walls, sprinkled all over with mica-rich dust.

Ned Land tapped these walls and tried to probe their thickness.

I couldn't help smiling.

Our conversation then turned to his everlasting escape plans, and without going too far, I felt I could offer him this hope: Captain Nemo had gone down south only to replenish his sodium supplies.

So I hoped he would now hug the coasts of Europe and America, which would allow the Canadian to try again with a greater chance of success.

We were stretched out in this delightful cave for an hour.

Our conversation, lively at the outset, then languished.

A definite drowsiness overcame us.

Since I saw no good reason to resist the call of sleep, I fell into a heavy doze.

I dreamed--one doesn't choose his dreams--that my life had been reduced to the vegetating existence of a simple mollusk.

It seemed to me that this cave made up my double-valved shell.

.

.

.

Suddenly Conseil's voice startled me awake.

"Get up!

Get up!"

shouted the fine lad.

"What is it?"

I asked, in a sitting position.

"The water's coming up to us!"

I got back on my feet.

Like a torrent the sea was rushing into our retreat, and since we definitely were not mollusks, we had to clear out.

In a few seconds we were safe on top of the cave.

"What happened?"

Conseil asked.

"Some new phenomenon?"

"Not quite, my friends!"

I replied.

"It was the tide, merely the tide, which wellnigh caught us by surprise just as it did Sir Walter Scott's hero!

The ocean outside is rising, and by a perfectly natural law of balance, the level of this lake is also rising.

We've gotten off with a mild dunking.

Let's go change clothes on the Nautilus."

Three-quarters of an hour later, we had completed our circular stroll and were back on board.

Just then the crewmen finished loading the sodium supplies, and the Nautilus could have departed immediately.

But Captain Nemo gave no orders.

Would he wait for nightfall and exit through his underwater passageway in secrecy?

Perhaps.

Be that as it may, by the next day the Nautilus had left its home port and was navigating well out from any shore, a few meters beneath the waves of the Atlantic.

The Sargasso Sea THE NAUTILUS didn't change direction.

For the time being, then, we had to set aside any hope of returning to European seas.

Captain Nemo kept his prow pointing south.

Where was he taking us?

I was afraid to guess.

That day the Nautilus crossed an odd part of the Atlantic Ocean.

No one is unaware of the existence of that great warm-water current known by name as the Gulf Stream.

After emerging from channels off Florida, it heads toward Spitzbergen.

But before entering the Gulf of Mexico near latitude 44 degrees north, this current divides into two arms; its chief arm makes for the shores of Ireland and Norway while the second flexes southward at the level of the Azores; then it hits the coast of Africa, sweeps in a long oval, and returns to the Caribbean Sea.

Now then, this second arm--more accurately, a collar--forms a ring of warm water around a section of cool, tranquil, motionless ocean called the Sargasso Sea.

This is an actual lake in the open Atlantic, and the great current's waters take at least three years to circle it.

Properly speaking, the Sargasso Sea covers every submerged part of Atlantis.

Certain authors have even held that the many weeds strewn over this sea were torn loose from the prairies of that ancient continent.

But it's more likely that these grasses, algae, and fucus plants were carried off from the beaches of Europe and America, then taken as far as this zone by the Gulf Stream.

This is one of the reasons why Christopher Columbus assumed the existence of a New World.

When the ships of that bold investigator arrived in the Sargasso Sea, they had great difficulty navigating in the midst of these weeds, which, much to their crews' dismay, slowed them down to a halt; and they wasted three long weeks crossing this sector.

Such was the region our Nautilus was visiting just then: a genuine prairie, a tightly woven carpet of algae, gulfweed, and bladder wrack so dense and compact a craft's stempost couldn't tear through it without difficulty.

Accordingly, not wanting to entangle his propeller in this weed-choked mass, Captain Nemo stayed at a depth some meters below the surface of the waves.

The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish word "sargazo,"

meaning gulfweed.

This gulfweed, the swimming gulfweed or berry carrier, is the chief substance making up this immense shoal.

And here's why these water plants collect in this placid Atlantic basin, The Physical Geography of the Sea.

The explanation he gives seems to entail a set of conditions that everybody knows: "Now,"

Maury says, "if bits of cork or chaff, or any floating substance, be put into a basin, and a circular motion be given to the water, all the light substances will be found crowding together near the center of the pool, where there is the least motion.

Just such a basin is the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf Stream, and the Sargasso Sea is the center of the whirl."

I share Maury's view, and I was able to study the phenomenon in this exclusive setting where ships rarely go.

Above us, huddled among the brown weeds, there floated objects originating from all over: tree trunks ripped from the Rocky Mountains or the Andes and sent floating down the Amazon or the Mississippi, numerous pieces of wreckage, remnants of keels or undersides, bulwarks staved in and so weighed down with seashells and barnacles, they couldn't rise to the surface of the ocean.

And the passing years will someday bear out Maury's other view that by collecting in this way over the centuries, these substances will be turned to stone by the action of the waters and will then form inexhaustible coalfields.

Valuable reserves prepared by farseeing nature for that time when man will have exhausted his mines on the continents.

In the midst of this hopelessly tangled fabric of weeds and fucus plants, I noted some delightful pink-colored, star-shaped alcyon coral, sea anemone trailing the long tresses of their tentacles, some green, red, and blue jellyfish, and especially those big rhizostome jellyfish that Cuvier described, whose bluish parasols are trimmed with violet festoons.

We spent the whole day of February 22 in the Sargasso Sea, where fish that dote on marine plants and crustaceans find plenty to eat.

The next day the ocean resumed its usual appearance.

From this moment on, for nineteen days from February 23 to March 12, the Nautilus stayed in the middle of the Atlantic, hustling us along at a constant speed of 100 leagues every twenty-four hours.

It was obvious that Captain Nemo wanted to carry out his underwater program, and I had no doubt that he intended, after doubling Cape Horn, to return to the Pacific South Seas.

So Ned Land had good reason to worry.

In these wide seas empty of islands, it was no longer feasible to jump ship.

Nor did we have any way to counter Captain Nemo's whims.

We had no choice but to acquiesce; but if we couldn't attain our end through force or cunning, I liked to think we might achieve it through persuasion.

Once this voyage was over, might not Captain Nemo consent to set us free in return for our promise never to reveal his existence?

Our word of honor, which we sincerely would have kept.

However, this delicate question would have to be negotiated with the captain.

But how would he receive our demands for freedom?

At the very outset and in no uncertain terms, hadn't he declared that the secret of his life required that we be permanently imprisoned on board the Nautilus?

Wouldn't he see my four-month silence as a tacit acceptance of this situation?

Would my returning to this subject arouse suspicions that could jeopardize our escape plans, if we had promising circumstances for trying again later on?

I weighed all these considerations, turned them over in my mind, submitted them to Conseil, but he was as baffled as I was.

In short, although I'm not easily discouraged, I realized that my chances of ever seeing my fellow men again were shrinking by the day, especially at a time when Captain Nemo was recklessly racing toward the south Atlantic!

During those nineteen days just mentioned, no unique incidents distinguished our voyage.

I saw little of the captain.

He was at work.

In the library I often found books he had left open, especially books on natural history.

He had thumbed through my work on the great ocean depths, and the margins were covered with his notes, which sometimes contradicted my theories and formulations.

But the captain remained content with this method of refining my work, and he rarely discussed it with me.

Sometimes I heard melancholy sounds reverberating from the organ, which he played very expressively, but only at night in the midst of the most secretive darkness, while the Nautilus slumbered in the wilderness of the ocean.

During this part of our voyage, we navigated on the surface of the waves for entire days.

The sea was nearly deserted.

A few sailing ships, laden for the East Indies, were heading toward the Cape of Good Hope.

One day we were chased by the longboats of a whaling vessel, which undoubtedly viewed us as some enormous baleen whale of great value.

But Captain Nemo didn't want these gallant gentlemen wasting their time and energy, so he ended the hunt by diving beneath the waters.

This incident seemed to fascinate Ned Land intensely.

I'm sure the Canadian was sorry that these fishermen couldn't harpoon our sheet-iron cetacean and mortally wound it.

During this period the fish Conseil and I observed differed little from those we had already studied in other latitudes.

Chief among them were specimens of that dreadful cartilaginous genus that's divided into three subgenera numbering at least thirty-two species: striped sharks five meters long, the head squat and wider than the body, the caudal fin curved, the back with seven big, black, parallel lines running lengthwise; then perlon sharks, ash gray, pierced with seven gill openings, furnished with a single dorsal fin placed almost exactly in the middle of the body.

Some big dogfish also passed by, a voracious species of shark if there ever was one.

With some justice, fishermen's yarns aren't to be trusted, but here's what a few of them relate.

Inside the corpse of one of these animals there were found a buffalo head and a whole calf; in another, two tuna and a sailor in uniform; in yet another, a soldier with his saber; in another, finally, a horse with its rider.

In candor, none of these sounds like divinely inspired truth.

But the fact remains that not a single dogfish let itself get caught in the Nautilus's nets, so I can't vouch for their voracity.

Schools of elegant, playful dolphin swam alongside for entire days.

They went in groups of five or six, hunting in packs like wolves over the countryside; moreover, they're just as voracious as dogfish, if I can believe a certain Copenhagen professor who says that from one dolphin's stomach, he removed thirteen porpoises and fifteen seals.

True, it was a killer whale, belonging to the biggest known species, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-four feet.

The family Delphinia numbers ten genera, and the dolphins I saw were akin to the genus Delphinorhynchus, remarkable for an extremely narrow muzzle four times as long as the cranium.

Measuring three meters, their bodies were black on top, underneath a pinkish white strewn with small, very scattered spots.

From these seas I'll also mention some unusual specimens of croakers, fish from the order Acanthopterygia, family Scienidea.

Some authors-- more artistic than scientific--claim that these fish are melodious singers, that their voices in unison put on concerts unmatched by human choristers.

I don't say nay, but to my regret these croakers didn't serenade us as we passed.

Finally, to conclude, Conseil classified a large number of flying fish.

Nothing could have made a more unusual sight than the marvelous timing with which dolphins hunt these fish.

Whatever the range of its flight, however evasive its trajectory (even up and over the Nautilus), the hapless flying fish always found a dolphin to welcome it with open mouth.

These were either flying gurnards or kitelike sea robins, whose lips glowed in the dark, at night scrawling fiery streaks in the air before plunging into the murky waters like so many shooting stars.

Our navigating continued under these conditions until March 13.

That day the Nautilus was put to work in some depth-sounding experiments that fascinated me deeply.

By then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our starting point in the Pacific high seas.

Our position fix placed us in latitude 45 degrees 37' south and longitude 37 degrees 53' west.

These were the same waterways where Captain Denham, aboard the Herald, payed out 14,000 meters of sounding line without finding bottom.

It was here too that Lieutenant Parker, aboard the American frigate Congress, was unable to reach the underwater soil at 15,149 meters.

Captain Nemo decided to take his Nautilus down to the lowest depths in order to double-check these different soundings.

I got ready to record the results of this experiment.

The panels in the lounge opened, and maneuvers began for reaching those strata so prodigiously far removed.

It was apparently considered out of the question to dive by filling the ballast tanks.

Perhaps they wouldn't sufficiently increase the Nautilus's specific gravity.

Moreover, in order to come back up, it would be necessary to expel the excess water, and our pumps might not have been strong enough to overcome the outside pressure.

Captain Nemo decided to make for the ocean floor by submerging on an appropriately gradual diagonal with the help of his side fins, which were set at a 45 degrees angle to the Nautilus's waterline.

Then the propeller was brought to its maximum speed, and its four blades churned the waves with indescribable violence.

Under this powerful thrust the Nautilus's hull quivered like a resonating chord, and the ship sank steadily under the waters.

Stationed in the lounge, the captain and I watched the needle swerving swiftly over the pressure gauge.

Soon we had gone below the livable zone where most fish reside.

Some of these animals can thrive only at the surface of seas or rivers, but a minority can dwell at fairly great depths.

Among the latter I observed a species of dogfish called the cow shark that's equipped with six respiratory slits, the telescope fish with its enormous eyes, the armored gurnard with gray thoracic fins plus black pectoral fins and a breastplate protected by pale red slabs of bone, then finally the grenadier, living at a depth of 1,200 meters, by that point tolerating a pressure of 120 atmospheres.

I asked Captain Nemo if he had observed any fish at more considerable depths.

"Fish?

Rarely!"

he answered me.

"But given the current state of marine science, who are we to presume, what do we really know of these depths?"

"Just this, captain.

In going toward the ocean's lower strata, we know that vegetable life disappears more quickly than animal life.

We know that moving creatures can still be encountered where water plants no longer grow.

We know that oysters and pilgrim scallops live in 2,000 meters of water, and that Admiral McClintock, England's hero of the polar seas, pulled in a live sea star from a depth of 2,500 meters.

We know that the crew of the Royal Navy's Bulldog fished up a starfish from 2,620 fathoms, hence from a depth of more than one vertical league.

Would you still say, Captain Nemo, that we really know nothing?"

"No, professor,"

the captain replied, "I wouldn't be so discourteous.

Yet I'll ask you to explain how these creatures can live at such depths?"

"I explain it on two grounds,"

I replied.

"In the first place, because vertical currents, which are caused by differences in the water's salinity and density, can produce enough motion to sustain the rudimentary lifestyles of sea lilies and starfish."

"True,"

the captain put in.

"In the second place, because oxygen is the basis of life, and we know that the amount of oxygen dissolved in salt water increases rather than decreases with depth, that the pressure in these lower strata helps to concentrate their oxygen content."

"Oho!

We know that, do we?"

Captain Nemo replied in a tone of mild surprise.

"Well, professor, we have good reason to know it because it's the truth.

I might add, in fact, that the air bladders of fish contain more nitrogen than oxygen when these animals are caught at the surface of the water, and conversely, more oxygen than nitrogen when they're pulled up from the lower depths.

Which bears out your formulation.

But let's continue our observations."

My eyes flew back to the pressure gauge.

The instrument indicated a depth of 6,000 meters.

Our submergence had been going on for an hour.

The Nautilus slid downward on its slanting fins, still sinking.

These deserted waters were wonderfully clear, with a transparency impossible to convey.

An hour later we were at 13,000 meters-- about three and a quarter vertical leagues--and the ocean floor was nowhere in sight.

However, at 14,000 meters I saw blackish peaks rising in the midst of the waters.

But these summits could have belonged to mountains as high or even higher than the Himalayas or Mt.

Blanc, and the extent of these depths remained incalculable.

Despite the powerful pressures it was undergoing, the Nautilus sank still deeper.

I could feel its sheet-iron plates trembling down to their riveted joins; metal bars arched; bulkheads groaned; the lounge windows seemed to be warping inward under the water's pressure.

And this whole sturdy mechanism would surely have given way, if, as its captain had said, it weren't capable of resisting like a solid block.

While grazing these rocky slopes lost under the waters, I still spotted some seashells, tube worms, lively annelid worms from the genus Spirorbis, and certain starfish specimens.

But soon these last representatives of animal life vanished, and three vertical leagues down, the Nautilus passed below the limits of underwater existence just as an air balloon rises above the breathable zones in the sky.

We reached a depth of 16,000 meters-- four vertical leagues--and by then the Nautilus's plating was tolerating a pressure of 1,600 atmospheres, in other words, 1,600 kilograms per each square centimeter on its surface!

"What an experience!"

I exclaimed.

"Traveling these deep regions where no man has ever ventured before!

Look, captain!

Look at these magnificent rocks, these uninhabited caves, these last global haunts where life is no longer possible!

What unheard-of scenery, and why are we reduced to preserving it only as a memory?"

"Would you like,"

Captain Nemo asked me, "to bring back more than just a memory?"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that nothing could be easier than taking a photograph of this underwater region!"

Before I had time to express the surprise this new proposition caused me, a camera was carried into the lounge at Captain Nemo's request.

The liquid setting, electrically lit, unfolded with perfect clarity through the wide-open panels.

No shadows, no blurs, thanks to our artificial light.

Not even sunshine could have been better for our purposes.

With the thrust of its propeller curbed by the slant of its fins, the Nautilus stood still.

The camera was aimed at the scenery on the ocean floor, and in a few seconds we had a perfect negative.

I attach a print of the positive.

In it you can view these primordial rocks that have never seen the light of day, this nether granite that forms the powerful foundation of our globe, the deep caves cut into the stony mass, the outlines of incomparable distinctness whose far edges stand out in black as if from the brush of certain Flemish painters.

In the distance is a mountainous horizon, a wondrously undulating line that makes up the background of this landscape.

The general effect of these smooth rocks is indescribable: black, polished, without moss or other blemish, carved into strange shapes, sitting firmly on a carpet of sand that sparkled beneath our streams of electric light.

Meanwhile, his photographic operations over, Captain Nemo told me: "Let's go back up, professor.

We mustn't push our luck and expose the Nautilus too long to these pressures."

"Let's go back up!"

I replied.

"Hold on tight."

Before I had time to realize why the captain made this recommendation, I was hurled to the carpet.

Its fins set vertically, its propeller thrown in gear at the captain's signal, the Nautilus rose with lightning speed, shooting upward like an air balloon into the sky.

Vibrating resonantly, it knifed through the watery mass.

Not a single detail was visible.

In four minutes it had cleared the four vertical leagues separating it from the surface of the ocean, and after emerging like a flying fish, it fell back into the sea, making the waves leap to prodigious heights.

Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales DURING THE NIGHT of March 13-14, the Nautilus resumed its southward heading.

Once it was abreast of Cape Horn, I thought it would strike west of the cape, make for Pacific seas, and complete its tour of the world.

It did nothing of the sort and kept moving toward the southernmost regions.

So where was it bound?

The pole?

That was insanity.

I was beginning to think that the captain's recklessness more than justified Ned Land's worst fears.

For a good while the Canadian had said nothing more to me about his escape plans.

He had become less sociable, almost sullen.

I could see how heavily this protracted imprisonment was weighing on him.

I could feel the anger building in him.

Whenever he encountered the captain, his eyes would flicker with dark fire, and I was in constant dread that his natural vehemence would cause him to do something rash.

That day, March 14, he and Conseil managed to find me in my stateroom.

I asked them the purpose of their visit.

"To put a simple question to you, sir,"

the Canadian answered me.

"Go on, Ned."

"How many men do you think are on board the Nautilus?"

"I'm unable to say, my friend."

"It seems to me,"

Ned Land went on, "that it wouldn't take much of a crew to run a ship like this one."

"Correct,"

I replied.

"Under existing conditions some ten men at the most should be enough to operate it."

"All right,"

the Canadian said, "then why should there be any more than that?"

"Why?"

I answered.

I stared at Ned Land, whose motives were easy to guess.

"Because,"

I said, "if I can trust my hunches, if I truly understand the captain's way of life, his Nautilus isn't simply a ship.

It's meant to be a refuge for people like its commander, people who have severed all ties with the shore."

"Perhaps,"

Conseil said, "but in a nutshell, the Nautilus can hold only a certain number of men, so couldn't master estimate their maximum?"

"How, Conseil?"

"By calculating it.

Master is familiar with the ship's capacity, hence the amount of air it contains; on the other hand, master knows how much air each man consumes in the act of breathing, and he can compare this data with the fact that the Nautilus must rise to the surface every twenty-four hours .

.

."

Conseil didn't finish his sentence, but I could easily see what he was driving at.

"I follow you,"

I said.

"But while they're simple to do, such calculations can give only a very uncertain figure."

"No problem,"

the Canadian went on insistently.

"Then here's how to calculate it,"

I replied.

"In one hour each man consumes the oxygen contained in 100 liters of air, hence during twenty-four hours the oxygen contained in 2,400 liters.

Therefore, we must look for the multiple of 2,400 liters of air that gives us the amount found in the Nautilus."

"Precisely,"

Conseil said.

"Now then,"

I went on, "the Nautilus's capacity is 1,500 metric tons, and that of a ton is 1,000 liters, so the Nautilus holds 1,500,000 liters of air, which, divided by 2,400 .

.

."

I did a quick pencil calculation.

".

.

.

gives us the quotient of 625.

Which is tantamount to saying that the air contained in the Nautilus would be exactly enough for 625 men over twenty-four hours."

"625!"

Ned repeated.

"But rest assured,"

I added, "that between passengers, seamen, or officers, we don't total one-tenth of that figure."

"Which is still too many for three men!"

Conseil muttered.

"So, my poor Ned, I can only counsel patience."

"And,"

Conseil replied, "even more than patience, resignation."

Conseil had said the true word.

"Even so,"

he went on, "Captain Nemo can't go south forever!

He'll surely have to stop, if only at the Ice Bank, and he'll return to the seas of civilization!

Then it will be time to resume Ned Land's plans."

The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand over his brow, made no reply, and left us.

"With master's permission, I'll make an observation to him,"

Conseil then told me.

"Our poor Ned broods about all the things he can't have.

He's haunted by his former life.

He seems to miss everything that's denied us.

He's obsessed by his old memories and it's breaking his heart.

We must understand him.

What does he have to occupy him here?

Nothing.

He isn't a scientist like master, and he doesn't share our enthusiasm for the sea's wonders.

He would risk anything just to enter a tavern in his own country!"

To be sure, the monotony of life on board must have seemed unbearable to the Canadian, who was accustomed to freedom and activity.

It was a rare event that could excite him.

That day, however, a development occurred that reminded him of his happy years as a harpooner.

Near eleven o'clock in the morning, while on the surface of the ocean, the Nautilus fell in with a herd of baleen whales.

This encounter didn't surprise me, because I knew these animals were being hunted so relentlessly that they took refuge in the ocean basins of the high latitudes.

In the maritime world and in the realm of geographic exploration, whales have played a major role.

This is the animal that first dragged the Basques in its wake, then Asturian Spaniards, Englishmen, and Dutchmen, emboldening them against the ocean's perils, and leading them to the ends of the earth.

Baleen whales like to frequent the southernmost and northernmost seas.

Old legends even claim that these cetaceans led fishermen to within a mere seven leagues of the North Pole.

Although this feat is fictitious, it will someday come true, because it's likely that by hunting whales in the Arctic or Antarctic regions, man will finally reach this unknown spot on the globe.

We were seated on the platform next to a tranquil sea.

The month of March, since it's the equivalent of October in these latitudes, was giving us some fine autumn days.

It was the Canadian-- on this topic he was never mistaken--who sighted a baleen whale on the eastern horizon.

If you looked carefully, you could see its blackish back alternately rise and fall above the waves, five miles from the Nautilus.

"Wow!"

Ned Land exclaimed.

"If I were on board a whaler, there's an encounter that would be great fun!

That's one big animal!

Look how high its blowholes are spouting all that air and steam!

Damnation!

Why am I chained to this hunk of sheet iron!"

"Why, Ned!"

I replied.

"You still aren't over your old fishing urges?"

"How could a whale fisherman forget his old trade, sir?

Who could ever get tired of such exciting hunting?"

"You've never fished these seas, Ned?"

"Never, sir.

Just the northernmost seas, equally in the Bering Strait and the Davis Strait."

"So the southern right whale is still unknown to you.

Until now it's the bowhead whale you've hunted, and it won't risk going past the warm waters of the equator."

"Oh, professor, what are you feeding me?"

the Canadian answered in a tolerably skeptical tone.

"I'm feeding you the facts."

"By thunder!

In '65, just two and a half years ago, I to whom you speak, I myself stepped onto the carcass of a whale near Greenland, and its flank still carried the marked harpoon of a whaling ship from the Bering Sea.

Now I ask you, after it had been wounded west of America, how could this animal be killed in the east, unless it had cleared the equator and doubled Cape Horn or the Cape of Good Hope?"

"I agree with our friend Ned,"

Conseil said, "and I'm waiting to hear how master will reply to him."

"Master will reply, my friends, that baleen whales are localized, according to species, within certain seas that they never leave.

And if one of these animals went from the Bering Strait to the Davis Strait, it's quite simply because there's some passageway from the one sea to the other, either along the coasts of Canada or Siberia."

"You expect us to fall for that?"

the Canadian asked, tipping me a wink.

"If master says so,"

Conseil replied.

"Which means,"

the Canadian went on, "since I've never fished these waterways, I don't know the whales that frequent them?"

"That's what I've been telling you, Ned."

"All the more reason to get to know them,"

Conseil answered.

"Look!

Look!"

the Canadian exclaimed, his voice full of excitement.

"It's approaching!

It's coming toward us!

It's thumbing its nose at me!

It knows I can't do a blessed thing to it!"

Ned stamped his foot.

Brandishing an imaginary harpoon, his hands positively trembled.

"These cetaceans,"

he asked, "are they as big as the ones in the northernmost seas?"

"Pretty nearly, Ned."

"Because I've seen big baleen whales, sir, whales measuring up to 100 feet long!

I've even heard that those rorqual whales off the Aleutian Islands sometimes get over 150 feet."

"That strikes me as exaggerated,"

I replied.

"Those animals are only members of the genus Balaenoptera furnished with dorsal fins, and like sperm whales, they're generally smaller than the bowhead whale."

"Oh!"

exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes hadn't left the ocean.

"It's getting closer, it's coming into the Nautilus's waters!"

Then, going on with his conversation: "You talk about sperm whales,"

he said, "as if they were little beasts!

But there are stories of gigantic sperm whales.

They're shrewd cetaceans.

I hear that some will cover themselves with algae and fucus plants.

People mistake them for islets.

They pitch camp on top, make themselves at home, light a fire--"

"Build houses,"

Conseil said.

"Yes, funny man,"

Ned Land replied.

"Then one fine day the animal dives and drags all its occupants down into the depths."

"Like in the voyages of Sinbad the Sailor,"

I answered, laughing.

"Oh, Mr.

Land, you're addicted to tall tales!

What sperm whales you're handing us!

I hope you don't really believe in them!"

"Mr.

Naturalist,"

the Canadian replied in all seriousness, "when it comes to whales, you can believe anything!

(Look at that one move!

Look at it stealing away!) People claim these animals can circle around the world in just fifteen days."

"I don't say nay."

"But what you undoubtedly don't know, Professor Aronnax, is that at the beginning of the world, whales traveled even quicker."

"Oh really, Ned!

And why so?"

"Because in those days their tails moved side to side, like those on fish, in other words, their tails were straight up, thrashing the water from left to right, right to left.

But spotting that they swam too fast, our Creator twisted their tails, and ever since they've been thrashing the waves up and down, at the expense of their speed."

"Fine, Ned,"

I said, then resurrected one of the Canadian's expressions.

"You expect us to fall for that?"

"Not too terribly,"

Ned Land replied, "and no more than if I told you there are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds."

"That's indeed considerable,"

I said.

"But you must admit that certain cetaceans do grow to significant size, since they're said to supply as much as 120 metric tons of oil."

"That I've seen,"

the Canadian said.

"I can easily believe it, Ned, just as I can believe that certain baleen whales equal 100 elephants in bulk.

Imagine the impact of such a mass if it were launched at full speed!"

"Is it true,"

Conseil asked, "that they can sink ships?"

"Ships?

I doubt it,"

I replied.

"However, they say that in 1820, right in these southern seas, a baleen whale rushed at the Essex and pushed it backward at a speed of four meters per second.

Its stern was flooded, and the Essex went down fast."

Ned looked at me with a bantering expression.

"Speaking for myself,"

he said, "I once got walloped by a whale's tail-- in my longboat, needless to say.

My companions and I were launched to an altitude of six meters.

But next to the professor's whale, mine was just a baby."

"Do these animals live a long time?"

Conseil asked.

"A thousand years,"

the Canadian replied without hesitation.

"And how, Ned,"

I asked, "do you know that's so?"

"Because people say so."

"And why do people say so?"

"Because people know so."

"No, Ned!

People don't know so, they suppose so, and here's the logic with which they back up their beliefs.

When fishermen first hunted whales 400 years ago, these animals grew to bigger sizes than they do today.

Reasonably enough, it's assumed that today's whales are smaller because they haven't had time to reach their full growth.

That's why the Count de Buffon's encyclopedia says that cetaceans can live, and even must live, for a thousand years.

You understand?"

Ned Land didn't understand.

He no longer even heard me.

That baleen whale kept coming closer.

His eyes devoured it.

"Oh!"

he exclaimed.

"It's not just one whale, it's ten, twenty, a whole gam!

And I can't do a thing!

I'm tied hand and foot!"

"But Ned my friend,"

Conseil said, "why not ask Captain Nemo for permission to hunt--"

Before Conseil could finish his sentence, Ned Land scooted down the hatch and ran to look for the captain.

A few moments later, the two of them reappeared on the platform.

Captain Nemo observed the herd of cetaceans cavorting on the waters a mile from the Nautilus.

"They're southern right whales,"

he said.

"There goes the fortune of a whole whaling fleet."

"Well, sir,"

the Canadian asked, "couldn't I hunt them, just so I don't forget my old harpooning trade?"

"Hunt them?

What for?"

Captain Nemo replied.

"Simply to destroy them?

We have no use for whale oil on this ship."

"But, sir,"

the Canadian went on, "in the Red Sea you authorized us to chase a dugong!"

"There it was an issue of obtaining fresh meat for my crew.

Here it would be killing for the sake of killing.

I'm well aware that's a privilege reserved for mankind, but I don't allow such murderous pastimes.

When your peers, Mr.

Land, destroy decent, harmless creatures like the southern right whale or the bowhead whale, they commit a reprehensible offense.

Thus they've already depopulated all of Baffin Bay, and they'll wipe out a whole class of useful animals.

So leave these poor cetaceans alone.

They have quite enough natural enemies, such as sperm whales, swordfish, and sawfish, without you meddling with them."

I'll let the reader decide what faces the Canadian made during this lecture on hunting ethics.

Furnishing such arguments to a professional harpooner was a waste of words.

Ned Land stared at Captain Nemo and obviously missed his meaning.

But the captain was right.

Thanks to the mindless, barbaric bloodthirstiness of fishermen, the last baleen whale will someday disappear from the ocean.

Ned Land whistled "Yankee Doodle"

between his teeth, stuffed his hands in his pockets, and turned his back on us.

Meanwhile Captain Nemo studied the herd of cetaceans, then addressed me: "I was right to claim that baleen whales have enough natural enemies without counting man.

These specimens will soon have to deal with mighty opponents.

Eight miles to leeward, Professor Aronnax, can you see those blackish specks moving about?"

"Yes, captain,"

I replied.

"Those are sperm whales, dreadful animals that I've sometimes encountered in herds of 200 or 300!

As for them, they're cruel, destructive beasts, and they deserve to be exterminated."

The Canadian turned swiftly at these last words.

"Well, captain,"

I said, "on behalf of the baleen whales, there's still time--"

"It's pointless to run any risks, professor.

The Nautilus will suffice to disperse these sperm whales.

It's armed with a steel spur quite equal to Mr.

Land's harpoon, I imagine."

The Canadian didn't even bother shrugging his shoulders.

Attacking cetaceans with thrusts from a spur!

Who ever heard of such malarkey!

"Wait and see, Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo said.

"We'll show you a style of hunting with which you aren't yet familiar.

We'll take no pity on these ferocious cetaceans.

They're merely mouth and teeth!"

Mouth and teeth!

There's no better way to describe the long-skulled sperm whale, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-five meters.

The enormous head of this cetacean occupies about a third of its body.

Better armed than a baleen whale, whose upper jaw is adorned solely with whalebone, the sperm whale is equipped with twenty-five huge teeth that are twenty centimeters high, have cylindrical, conical summits, and weigh two pounds each.

In the top part of this enormous head, inside big cavities separated by cartilage, you'll find 300 to 400 kilograms of that valuable oil called "spermaceti."

The sperm whale is an awkward animal, more tadpole than fish, as Professor Frdol has noted.

It's poorly constructed, being "defective,"

so to speak, over the whole left side of its frame, with good eyesight only in its right eye.

Meanwhile that monstrous herd kept coming closer.

It had seen the baleen whales and was preparing to attack.

You could tell in advance that the sperm whales would be victorious, not only because they were better built for fighting than their harmless adversaries, but also because they could stay longer underwater before returning to breathe at the surface.

There was just time to run to the rescue of the baleen whales.

The Nautilus proceeded to midwater.

Conseil, Ned, and I sat in front of the lounge windows.

Captain Nemo made his way to the helmsman's side to operate his submersible as an engine of destruction.

Soon I felt the beats of our propeller getting faster, and we picked up speed.

The battle between sperm whales and baleen whales had already begun when the Nautilus arrived.

It maneuvered to cut into the herd of long-skulled predators.

At first the latter showed little concern at the sight of this new monster meddling in the battle.

But they soon had to sidestep its thrusts.

What a struggle!

Ned Land quickly grew enthusiastic and even ended up applauding.

Brandished in its captain's hands, the Nautilus was simply a fearsome harpoon.

He hurled it at those fleshy masses and ran them clean through, leaving behind two squirming animal halves.

As for those daunting strokes of the tail hitting our sides, the ship never felt them.

No more than the collisions it caused.

One sperm whale exterminated, it ran at another, tacked on the spot so as not to miss its prey, went ahead or astern, obeyed its rudder, dived when the cetacean sank to deeper strata, rose with it when it returned to the surface, struck it head-on or slantwise, hacked at it or tore it, and from every direction and at any speed, skewered it with its dreadful spur.

What bloodshed!

What a hubbub on the surface of the waves!

What sharp hisses and snorts unique to these frightened animals!

Their tails churned the normally peaceful strata into actual billows.

This Homeric slaughter dragged on for an hour, and the long-skulled predators couldn't get away.

Several times ten or twelve of them teamed up, trying to crush the Nautilus with their sheer mass.

Through the windows you could see their enormous mouths paved with teeth, their fearsome eyes.

Losing all self-control, Ned Land hurled threats and insults at them.

You could feel them clinging to the submersible like hounds atop a wild boar in the underbrush.

But by forcing the pace of its propeller, the Nautilus carried them off, dragged them under, or brought them back to the upper level of the waters, untroubled by their enormous weight or their powerful grip.

Finally this mass of sperm whales thinned out.

The waves grew tranquil again.

I felt us rising to the surface of the ocean.

The hatch opened and we rushed onto the platform.

The sea was covered with mutilated corpses.

A fearsome explosion couldn't have slashed, torn, or shredded these fleshy masses with greater violence.

We were floating in the midst of gigantic bodies, bluish on the back, whitish on the belly, and all deformed by enormous protuberances.

A few frightened sperm whales were fleeing toward the horizon.

The waves were dyed red over an area of several miles, and the Nautilus was floating in the middle of a sea of blood.

Captain Nemo rejoined us.

"Well, Mr.

Land?"

he said.

"Well, sir,"

replied the Canadian, whose enthusiasm had subsided, "it's a dreadful sight for sure.

But I'm a hunter not a butcher, and this is plain butchery."

"It was a slaughter of destructive animals,"

the captain replied, "and the Nautilus is no butcher knife."

"I prefer my harpoon,"

the Canadian answered.

"To each his own,"

the captain replied, staring intently at Ned Land.

I was in dread the latter would give way to some violent outburst that might have had deplorable consequences.

But his anger was diverted by the sight of a baleen whale that the Nautilus had pulled alongside of just then.

This animal had been unable to escape the teeth of those sperm whales.

I recognized the southern right whale, its head squat, its body dark all over.

Anatomically, it's distinguished from the white whale and the black right whale by the fusion of its seven cervical vertebrae, and it numbers two more ribs than its relatives.

Floating on its side, its belly riddled with bites, the poor cetacean was dead.

Still hanging from the tip of its mutilated fin was a little baby whale that it had been unable to rescue from the slaughter.

Its open mouth let water flow through its whalebone like a murmuring surf.

Captain Nemo guided the Nautilus next to the animal's corpse.

Two of his men climbed onto the whale's flank, and to my astonishment, I saw them draw from its udders all the milk they held, in other words, enough to fill two or three casks.

The captain offered me a cup of this still-warm milk.

I couldn't help showing my distaste for such a beverage.

He assured me that this milk was excellent, no different from cow's milk.

I sampled it and agreed.

So this milk was a worthwhile reserve ration for us, because in the form of salt butter or cheese, it would provide a pleasant change of pace from our standard fare.

From that day on, I noted with some uneasiness that Ned Land's attitudes toward Captain Nemo grew worse and worse, and I decided to keep a close watch on the Canadian's movements and activities.

The Ice Bank THE NAUTILUS resumed its unruffled southbound heading.

It went along the 50th meridian with considerable speed.

Would it go to the pole?

I didn't think so, because every previous attempt to reach this spot on the globe had failed.

Besides, the season was already quite advanced, since March 13 on Antarctic shores corresponds with September 13 in the northernmost regions, which marks the beginning of the equinoctial period.

On March 14 at latitude 55 degrees, I spotted floating ice, plain pale bits of rubble twenty to twenty-five feet long, which formed reefs over which the sea burst into foam.

The Nautilus stayed on the surface of the ocean.

Having fished in the Arctic seas, Ned Land was already familiar with the sight of icebergs.

Conseil and I were marveling at them for the first time.

In the sky toward the southern horizon, there stretched a dazzling white band.

English whalers have given this the name "ice blink."

No matter how heavy the clouds may be, they can't obscure this phenomenon.

It announces the presence of a pack, or shoal, of ice.

Indeed, larger blocks of ice soon appeared, their brilliance varying at the whim of the mists.

Some of these masses displayed green veins, as if scrawled with undulating lines of copper sulfate.

Others looked like enormous amethysts, letting the light penetrate their insides.

The latter reflected the sun's rays from the thousand facets of their crystals.

The former, tinted with a bright limestone sheen, would have supplied enough building material to make a whole marble town.

The farther down south we went, the more these floating islands grew in numbers and prominence.

Polar birds nested on them by the thousands.

These were petrels, cape pigeons, or puffins, and their calls were deafening.

Mistaking the Nautilus for the corpse of a whale, some of them alighted on it and prodded its resonant sheet iron with pecks of their beaks.

During this navigating in the midst of the ice, Captain Nemo often stayed on the platform.

He observed these deserted waterways carefully.

I saw his calm eyes sometimes perk up.

In these polar seas forbidden to man, did he feel right at home, the lord of these unreachable regions?

Perhaps.

But he didn't say.

He stood still, reviving only when his pilot's instincts took over.

Then, steering his Nautilus with consummate dexterity, he skillfully dodged the masses of ice, some of which measured several miles in length, their heights varying from seventy to eighty meters.

Often the horizon seemed completely closed off.

Abreast of latitude 60 degrees, every passageway had disappeared.

Searching with care, Captain Nemo soon found a narrow opening into which he brazenly slipped, well aware, however, that it would close behind him.

Guided by his skillful hands, the Nautilus passed by all these different masses of ice, which are classified by size and shape with a precision that enraptured Conseil: "icebergs,"

or mountains; "ice fields,"

or smooth, limitless tracts; "drift ice,"

or floating floes; "packs,"

or broken tracts, called "patches"

when they're circular and "streams"

when they form long strips.

The temperature was fairly low.

Exposed to the outside air, the thermometer marked -2 degrees to -3 degrees centigrade.

But we were warmly dressed in furs, for which seals and aquatic bears had paid the price.

Evenly heated by all its electric equipment, the Nautilus's interior defied the most intense cold.

Moreover, to find a bearable temperature, the ship had only to sink just a few meters beneath the waves.

Two months earlier we would have enjoyed perpetual daylight in this latitude; but night already fell for three or four hours, and later it would cast six months of shadow over these circumpolar regions.

On March 15 we passed beyond the latitude of the South Shetland and South Orkney Islands.

The captain told me that many tribes of seals used to inhabit these shores; but English and American whalers, in a frenzy of destruction, slaughtered all the adults, including pregnant females, and where life and activity once existed, those fishermen left behind only silence and death.

Going along the 55th meridian, the Nautilus cut the Antarctic Circle on March 16 near eight o'clock in the morning.

Ice completely surrounded us and closed off the horizon.

Nevertheless, Captain Nemo went from passageway to passageway, always proceeding south.

"But where's he going?"

I asked.

"Straight ahead,"

Conseil replied.

"Ultimately, when he can't go any farther, he'll stop."

"I wouldn't bet on it!"

I replied.

And in all honesty, I confess that this venturesome excursion was far from displeasing to me.

I can't express the intensity of my amazement at the beauties of these new regions.

The ice struck superb poses.

Here, its general effect suggested an oriental town with countless minarets and mosques.

There, a city in ruins, flung to the ground by convulsions in the earth.

These views were varied continuously by the sun's oblique rays, or were completely swallowed up by gray mists in the middle of blizzards.

Then explosions, cave-ins, and great iceberg somersaults would occur all around us, altering the scenery like the changing landscape in a diorama.

If the Nautilus was submerged during these losses of balance, we heard the resulting noises spread under the waters with frightful intensity, and the collapse of these masses created daunting eddies down to the ocean's lower strata.

The Nautilus then rolled and pitched like a ship left to the fury of the elements.

Often, no longer seeing any way out, I thought we were imprisoned for good, but Captain Nemo, guided by his instincts, discovered new passageways from the tiniest indications.

He was never wrong when he observed slender threads of bluish water streaking through these ice fields.

Accordingly, I was sure that he had already risked his Nautilus in the midst of the Antarctic seas.

However, during the day of March 16, these tracts of ice completely barred our path.

It wasn't the Ice Bank as yet, just huge ice fields cemented together by the cold.

This obstacle couldn't stop Captain Nemo, and he launched his ship against the ice fields with hideous violence.

The Nautilus went into these brittle masses like a wedge, splitting them with dreadful cracklings.

It was an old-fashioned battering ram propelled with infinite power.

Hurled aloft, ice rubble fell back around us like hail.

Through brute force alone, the submersible carved out a channel for itself.

Carried away by its momentum, the ship sometimes mounted on top of these tracts of ice and crushed them with its weight, or at other times, when cooped up beneath the ice fields, it split them with simple pitching movements, creating wide punctures.

Violent squalls assaulted us during the daytime.

Thanks to certain heavy mists, we couldn't see from one end of the platform to the other.

The wind shifted abruptly to every point on the compass.

The snow was piling up in such packed layers, it had to be chipped loose with blows from picks.

Even in a temperature of merely -5 degrees centigrade, every outside part of the Nautilus was covered with ice.

A ship's rigging would have been unusable, because all its tackle would have jammed in the grooves of the pulleys.

Only a craft without sails, driven by an electric motor that needed no coal, could face such high latitudes.

Under these conditions the barometer generally stayed quite low.

It fell as far as 73.5 centimeters.

Our compass indications no longer offered any guarantees.

The deranged needles would mark contradictory directions as we approached the southern magnetic pole, which doesn't coincide with the South Pole proper.

In fact, according to the astronomer Hansteen, this magnetic pole is located fairly close to latitude 70 degrees and longitude 130 degrees, or abiding by the observations of Louis-Isidore Duperrey, in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 70 degrees 30'.

Hence we had to transport compasses to different parts of the ship, take many readings, and strike an average.

Often we could chart our course only by guesswork, a less than satisfactory method in the midst of these winding passageways whose landmarks change continuously.

At last on March 18, after twenty futile assaults, the Nautilus was decisively held in check.

No longer was it an ice stream, patch, or field--it was an endless, immovable barrier formed by ice mountains fused to each other.

"The Ice Bank!"

the Canadian told me.

For Ned Land, as well as for every navigator before us, I knew that this was the great insurmountable obstacle.

When the sun appeared for an instant near noon, Captain Nemo took a reasonably accurate sight that gave our position as longitude 51 degrees 30' and latitude 67 degrees 39' south.

This was a position already well along in these Antarctic regions.

As for the liquid surface of the sea, there was no longer any semblance of it before our eyes.

Before the Nautilus's spur there lay vast broken plains, a tangle of confused chunks with all the helter-skelter unpredictability typical of a river's surface a short while before its ice breakup; but in this case the proportions were gigantic.

Here and there stood sharp peaks, lean spires that rose as high as 200 feet; farther off, a succession of steeply cut cliffs sporting a grayish tint, huge mirrors that reflected the sparse rays of a sun half drowned in mist.

Beyond, a stark silence reigned in this desolate natural setting, a silence barely broken by the flapping wings of petrels or puffins.

By this point everything was frozen, even sound.

So the Nautilus had to halt in its venturesome course among these tracts of ice.

"Sir,"

Ned Land told me that day, "if your captain goes any farther .

.

."

"Yes?"

"He'll be a superman."

"How so, Ned?"

"Because nobody can clear the Ice Bank.

Your captain's a powerful man, but damnation, he isn't more powerful than nature.

If she draws a boundary line, there you stop, like it or not!"

"Correct, Ned Land, but I still want to know what's behind this Ice Bank!

Behold my greatest source of irritation--a wall!"

"Master is right,"

Conseil said.

"Walls were invented simply to frustrate scientists.

All walls should be banned."

"Fine!"

the Canadian put in.

"But we already know what's behind this Ice Bank."

"What?"

I asked.

"Ice, ice, and more ice."

"You may be sure of that, Ned,"

I answered, "but I'm not.

That's why I want to see for myself."

"Well, professor,"

the Canadian replied, "you can just drop that idea!

You've made it to the Ice Bank, which is already far enough, but you won't get any farther, neither your Captain Nemo or his Nautilus.

And whether he wants to or not, we'll head north again, in other words, to the land of sensible people."

I had to agree that Ned Land was right, and until ships are built to navigate over tracts of ice, they'll have to stop at the Ice Bank.

Indeed, despite its efforts, despite the powerful methods it used to split this ice, the Nautilus was reduced to immobility.

Ordinarily, when someone can't go any farther, he still has the option of returning in his tracks.

But here it was just as impossible to turn back as to go forward, because every passageway had closed behind us, and if our submersible remained even slightly stationary, it would be frozen in without delay.

Which is exactly what happened near two o'clock in the afternoon, and fresh ice kept forming over the ship's sides with astonishing speed.

I had to admit that Captain Nemo's leadership had been most injudicious.

Just then I was on the platform.

Observing the situation for some while, the captain said to me: "Well, professor!

What think you?"

"I think we're trapped, captain."

"Trapped!

What do you mean?"

"I mean we can't go forward, backward, or sideways.

I think that's the standard definition of 'trapped,' at least in the civilized world."

"So, Professor Aronnax, you think the Nautilus won't be able to float clear?"

"Only with the greatest difficulty, captain, since the season is already too advanced for you to depend on an ice breakup."

"Oh, professor,"

Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone, "you never change!

You see only impediments and obstacles!

I promise you, not only will the Nautilus float clear, it will go farther still!"

"Farther south?"

I asked, gaping at the captain.

"Yes, sir, it will go to the pole."

"To the pole!"

I exclaimed, unable to keep back a movement of disbelief.

"Yes,"

the captain replied coolly, "the Antarctic pole, that unknown spot crossed by every meridian on the globe.

As you know, I do whatever I like with my Nautilus."

Yes, I did know that!

I knew this man was daring to the point of being foolhardy.

But to overcome all the obstacles around the South Pole--even more unattainable than the North Pole, which still hadn't been reached by the boldest navigators-- wasn't this an absolutely insane undertaking, one that could occur only in the brain of a madman?

It then dawned on me to ask Captain Nemo if he had already discovered this pole, which no human being had ever trod underfoot.

"No, sir,"

he answered me, "but we'll discover it together.

Where others have failed, I'll succeed.

Never before has my Nautilus cruised so far into these southernmost seas, but I repeat: it will go farther still."

"I'd like to believe you, captain,"

I went on in a tone of some sarcasm.

"Oh I do believe you!

Let's forge ahead!

There are no obstacles for us!

Let's shatter this Ice Bank!

Let's blow it up, and if it still resists, let's put wings on the Nautilus and fly over it!"

"Over it, professor?"

Captain Nemo replied serenely.

"No, not over it, but under it."

"Under it!"

I exclaimed.

A sudden insight into Captain Nemo's plans had just flashed through my mind.

I understood.

The marvelous talents of his Nautilus would be put to work once again in this superhuman undertaking!

"I can see we're starting to understand each other, professor,"

Captain Nemo told me with a half smile.

"You already glimpse the potential--myself, I'd say the success--of this attempt.

Maneuvers that aren't feasible for an ordinary ship are easy for the Nautilus.

If a continent emerges at the pole, we'll stop at that continent.

But on the other hand, if open sea washes the pole, we'll go to that very place!"

"Right,"

I said, carried away by the captain's logic.

"Even though the surface of the sea has solidified into ice, its lower strata are still open, thanks to that divine justice that puts the maximum density of salt water one degree above its freezing point.

And if I'm not mistaken, the submerged part of this Ice Bank is in a four-to-one ratio to its emerging part."

"Very nearly, professor.

For each foot of iceberg above the sea, there are three more below.

Now then, since these ice mountains don't exceed a height of 100 meters, they sink only to a depth of 300 meters.

And what are 300 meters to the Nautilus?"

"A mere nothing, sir."

"We could even go to greater depths and find that temperature layer common to all ocean water, and there we'd brave with impunity the -30 degrees or -40 degrees cold on the surface."

"True, sir, very true,"

I replied with growing excitement.

"Our sole difficulty,"

Captain Nemo went on, "lies in our staying submerged for several days without renewing our air supply."

"That's all?"

I answered.

"The Nautilus has huge air tanks; we'll fill them up and they'll supply all the oxygen we need."

"Good thinking, Professor Aronnax,"

the captain replied with a smile.

"But since I don't want to be accused of foolhardiness, I'm giving you all my objections in advance."

"You have more?"

"Just one.

If a sea exists at the South Pole, it's possible this sea may be completely frozen over, so we couldn't come up to the surface!"

"My dear sir, have you forgotten that the Nautilus is armed with a fearsome spur?

Couldn't it be launched diagonally against those tracts of ice, which would break open from the impact?"

"Ah, professor, you're full of ideas today!"

"Besides, captain,"

I added with still greater enthusiasm, "why wouldn't we find open sea at the South Pole just as at the North Pole?

The cold-temperature poles and the geographical poles don't coincide in either the northern or southern hemispheres, and until proof to the contrary, we can assume these two spots on the earth feature either a continent or an ice-free ocean."

"I think as you do, Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo replied.

"I'll only point out that after raising so many objections against my plan, you're now crushing me under arguments in its favor."

Captain Nemo was right.

I was outdoing him in daring!

It was I who was sweeping him to the pole.

I was leading the way, I was out in front .

.

.

but no, you silly fool!

Captain Nemo already knew the pros and cons of this question, and it amused him to see you flying off into impossible fantasies!

Nevertheless, he didn't waste an instant.

At his signal, the chief officer appeared.

The two men held a quick exchange in their incomprehensible language, and either the chief officer had been alerted previously or he found the plan feasible, because he showed no surprise.

But as unemotional as he was, he couldn't have been more impeccably emotionless than Conseil when I told the fine lad our intention of pushing on to the South Pole.

He greeted my announcement with the usual "As master wishes,"

and I had to be content with that.

As for Ned Land, no human shoulders ever executed a higher shrug than the pair belonging to our Canadian.

"Honestly, sir,"

he told me.

"You and your Captain Nemo, I pity you both!"

"But we will go to the pole, Mr.

Land."

"Maybe, but you won't come back!"

And Ned Land reentered his cabin, "to keep from doing something desperate,"

he said as he left me.

Meanwhile preparations for this daring attempt were getting under way.

The Nautilus's powerful pumps forced air down into the tanks and stored it under high pressure.

Near four o'clock Captain Nemo informed me that the platform hatches were about to be closed.

I took a last look at the dense Ice Bank we were going to conquer.

The weather was fair, the skies reasonably clear, the cold quite brisk, namely -12 degrees centigrade; but after the wind had lulled, this temperature didn't seem too unbearable.

Equipped with picks, some ten men climbed onto the Nautilus's sides and cracked loose the ice around the ship's lower plating, which was soon set free.

This operation was swiftly executed because the fresh ice was still thin.

We all reentered the interior.

The main ballast tanks were filled with the water that hadn't yet congealed at our line of flotation.

The Nautilus submerged without delay.

I took a seat in the lounge with Conseil.

Through the open window we stared at the lower strata of this southernmost ocean.

The thermometer rose again.

The needle on the pressure gauge swerved over its dial.

About 300 meters down, just as Captain Nemo had predicted, we cruised beneath the undulating surface of the Ice Bank.

But the Nautilus sank deeper still.

It reached a depth of 800 meters.

At the surface this water gave a temperature of -12 degrees centigrade, but now it gave no more than -10 degrees.

Two degrees had already been gained.

Thanks to its heating equipment, the Nautilus's temperature, needless to say, stayed at a much higher degree.

Every maneuver was accomplished with extraordinary precision.

"With all due respect to master,"

Conseil told me, "we'll pass it by."

"I fully expect to!"

I replied in a tone of deep conviction.

Now in open water, the Nautilus took a direct course to the pole without veering from the 52nd meridian.

From 67 degrees 30' to 90 degrees, twenty-two and a half degrees of latitude were left to cross, in other words, slightly more than 500 leagues.

The Nautilus adopted an average speed of twenty-six miles per hour, the speed of an express train.

If it kept up this pace, forty hours would do it for reaching the pole.

For part of the night, the novelty of our circumstances kept Conseil and me at the lounge window.

The sea was lit by our beacon's electric rays.

But the depths were deserted.

Fish didn't linger in these imprisoned waters.

Here they found merely a passageway for going from the Antarctic Ocean to open sea at the pole.

Our progress was swift.

You could feel it in the vibrations of the long steel hull.

Near two o'clock in the morning, I went to snatch a few hours of sleep.

Conseil did likewise.

I didn't encounter Captain Nemo while going down the gangways.

I assumed that he was keeping to the pilothouse.

The next day, March 19, at five o'clock in the morning, I was back at my post in the lounge.

The electric log indicated that the Nautilus had reduced speed.

By then it was rising to the surface, but cautiously, while slowly emptying its ballast tanks.

My heart was pounding.

Would we emerge into the open and find the polar air again?

No.

A jolt told me that the Nautilus had bumped the underbelly of the Ice Bank, still quite thick to judge from the hollowness of the accompanying noise.

Indeed, we had "struck bottom,"

to use nautical terminology, but in the opposite direction and at a depth of 3,000 feet.

That gave us 4,000 feet of ice overhead, of which 1,000 feet emerged above water.

So the Ice Bank was higher here than we had found it on the outskirts.

A circumstance less than encouraging.

Several times that day, the Nautilus repeated the same experiment and always it bumped against this surface that formed a ceiling above it.

At certain moments the ship encountered ice at a depth of 900 meters, denoting a thickness of 1,200 meters, of which 300 meters rose above the level of the ocean.

This height had tripled since the moment the Nautilus had dived beneath the waves.

I meticulously noted these different depths, obtaining the underwater profile of this upside-down mountain chain that stretched beneath the sea.

By evening there was still no improvement in our situation.

The ice stayed between 400 and 500 meters deep.

It was obviously shrinking, but what a barrier still lay between us and the surface of the ocean!

By then it was eight o'clock.

The air inside the Nautilus should have been renewed four hours earlier, following daily practice on board.

But I didn't suffer very much, although Captain Nemo hadn't yet made demands on the supplementary oxygen in his air tanks.

That night my sleep was fitful.

Hope and fear besieged me by turns.

I got up several times.

The Nautilus continued groping.

Near three o'clock in the morning, I observed that we encountered the Ice Bank's underbelly at a depth of only fifty meters.

So only 150 feet separated us from the surface of the water.

Little by little the Ice Bank was turning into an ice field again.

The mountains were changing back into plains.

My eyes didn't leave the pressure gauge.

We kept rising on a diagonal, going along this shiny surface that sparkled beneath our electric rays.

Above and below, the Ice Bank was subsiding in long gradients.

Mile after mile it was growing thinner.

Finally, at six o'clock in the morning on that memorable day of March 19, the lounge door opened.

Captain Nemo appeared.

"Open sea!"

he told me.

The South Pole I RUSHED UP onto the platform.

Yes, open sea!

Barely a few sparse floes, some moving icebergs; a sea stretching into the distance; hosts of birds in the air and myriads of fish under the waters, which varied from intense blue to olive green depending on the depth.

The thermometer marked 3 degrees centigrade.

It was as if a comparative springtime had been locked up behind that Ice Bank, whose distant masses were outlined on the northern horizon.

"Are we at the pole?"

I asked the captain, my heart pounding.

"I've no idea,"

he answered me.

"At noon we'll fix our position."

"But will the sun show through this mist?"

I said, staring at the grayish sky.

"No matter how faintly it shines, it will be enough for me,"

the captain replied.

To the south, ten miles from the Nautilus, a solitary islet rose to a height of 200 meters.

We proceeded toward it, but cautiously, because this sea could have been strewn with reefs.

In an hour we had reached the islet.

Two hours later we had completed a full circle around it.

It measured four to five miles in circumference.

A narrow channel separated it from a considerable shore, perhaps a continent whose limits we couldn't see.

The existence of this shore seemed to bear out Commander Maury's hypotheses.

In essence, this ingenious American has noted that between the South Pole and the 60th parallel, the sea is covered with floating ice of dimensions much greater than any found in the north Atlantic.

From this fact he drew the conclusion that the Antarctic Circle must contain considerable shores, since icebergs can't form on the high seas but only along coastlines.

According to his calculations, this frozen mass enclosing the southernmost pole forms a vast ice cap whose width must reach 4,000 kilometers.

Meanwhile, to avoid running aground, the Nautilus halted three cable lengths from a strand crowned by superb piles of rocks.

The skiff was launched to sea.

Two crewmen carrying instruments, the captain, Conseil, and I were on board.

It was ten o'clock in the morning.

I hadn't seen Ned Land.

No doubt, in the presence of the South Pole, the Canadian hated having to eat his words.

A few strokes of the oar brought the skiff to the sand, where it ran aground.

Just as Conseil was about to jump ashore, I held him back.

"Sir,"

I told Captain Nemo, "to you belongs the honor of first setting foot on this shore."

"Yes, sir,"

the captain replied, "and if I have no hesitation in treading this polar soil, it's because no human being until now has left a footprint here."

So saying, he leaped lightly onto the sand.

His heart must have been throbbing with intense excitement.

He scaled an overhanging rock that ended in a small promontory and there, mute and motionless, with crossed arms and blazing eyes, he seemed to be laying claim to these southernmost regions.

After spending five minutes in this trance, he turned to us.

"Whenever you're ready, sir,"

he called to me.

I got out, Conseil at my heels, leaving the two men in the skiff.

Over an extensive area, the soil consisted of that igneous gravel called "tuff,"

reddish in color as if made from crushed bricks.

The ground was covered with slag, lava flows, and pumice stones.

Its volcanic origin was unmistakable.

In certain localities thin smoke holes gave off a sulfurous odor, showing that the inner fires still kept their wide-ranging power.

Nevertheless, when I scaled a high escarpment, I could see no volcanoes within a radius of several miles.

In these Antarctic districts, as is well known, Sir James Clark Ross had found the craters of Mt.

Erebus and Mt.

Terror in fully active condition on the 167th meridian at latitude 77 degrees 32'.

The vegetation on this desolate continent struck me as quite limited.

A few lichens of the species Usnea melanoxanthra sprawled over the black rocks.

The whole meager flora of this region consisted of certain microscopic buds, rudimentary diatoms made up of a type of cell positioned between two quartz-rich shells, plus long purple and crimson fucus plants, buoyed by small air bladders and washed up on the coast by the surf.

The beach was strewn with mollusks: small mussels, limpets, smooth heart-shaped cockles, and especially some sea butterflies with oblong, membrane-filled bodies whose heads are formed from two rounded lobes.

I also saw myriads of those northernmost sea butterflies three centimeters long, which a baleen whale can swallow by the thousands in one gulp.

The open waters at the shoreline were alive with these delightful pteropods, true butterflies of the sea.

Among other zoophytes present in these shallows, there were a few coral tree forms that, according to Sir James Clark Ross, live in these Antarctic seas at depths as great as 1,000 meters; then small alcyon coral belonging to the species Procellaria pelagica, also a large number of starfish unique to these climes, plus some feather stars spangling the sand.

But it was in the air that life was superabundant.

There various species of birds flew and fluttered by the thousands, deafening us with their calls.

Crowding the rocks, other fowl watched without fear as we passed and pressed familiarly against our feet.

These were auks, as agile and supple in water, where they are sometimes mistaken for fast bonito, as they are clumsy and heavy on land.

They uttered outlandish calls and participated in numerous public assemblies that featured much noise but little action.

Among other fowl I noted some sheathbills from the wading-bird family, the size of pigeons, white in color, the beak short and conical, the eyes framed by red circles.

Conseil laid in a supply of them, because when they're properly cooked, these winged creatures make a pleasant dish.

In the air there passed sooty albatross with four-meter wingspans, birds aptly dubbed "vultures of the ocean,"

also gigantic petrels including several with arching wings, enthusiastic eaters of seal that are known as quebrantahuesos,* and cape pigeons, a sort of small duck, the tops of their bodies black and white--in short, a whole series of petrels, some whitish with wings trimmed in brown, others blue and exclusive to these Antarctic seas, the former "so oily,"

I told Conseil, "that inhabitants of the Faroe Islands simply fit the bird with a wick, then light it up."

*Spanish: "ospreys."

Ed.

"With that minor addition,"

Conseil replied, "these fowl would make perfect lamps!

After this, we should insist that nature equip them with wicks in advance!"

Half a mile farther on, the ground was completely riddled with penguin nests, egg-laying burrows from which numerous birds emerged.

Later Captain Nemo had hundreds of them hunted because their black flesh is highly edible.

They brayed like donkeys.

The size of a goose with slate-colored bodies, white undersides, and lemon-colored neck bands, these animals let themselves be stoned to death without making any effort to get away.

Meanwhile the mists didn't clear, and by eleven o'clock the sun still hadn't made an appearance.

Its absence disturbed me.

Without it, no sights were possible.

Then how could we tell whether we had reached the pole?

When I rejoined Captain Nemo, I found him leaning silently against a piece of rock and staring at the sky.

He seemed impatient, baffled.

But what could we do?

This daring and powerful man couldn't control the sun as he did the sea.

Noon arrived without the orb of day appearing for a single instant.

You couldn't even find its hiding place behind the curtain of mist.

And soon this mist began to condense into snow.

"Until tomorrow,"

the captain said simply; and we went back to the Nautilus, amid flurries in the air.

During our absence the nets had been spread, and I observed with fascination the fish just hauled on board.

The Antarctic seas serve as a refuge for an extremely large number of migratory fish that flee from storms in the subpolar zones, in truth only to slide down the gullets of porpoises and seals.

I noted some one-decimeter southern bullhead, a species of whitish cartilaginous fish overrun with bluish gray stripes and armed with stings, then some Antarctic rabbitfish three feet long, the body very slender, the skin a smooth silver white, the head rounded, the topside furnished with three fins, the snout ending in a trunk that curved back toward the mouth.

I sampled its flesh but found it tasteless, despite Conseil's views, which were largely approving.

The blizzard lasted until the next day.

It was impossible to stay on the platform.

From the lounge, where I was writing up the incidents of this excursion to the polar continent, I could hear the calls of petrel and albatross cavorting in the midst of the turmoil.

The Nautilus didn't stay idle, and cruising along the coast, it advanced some ten miles farther south amid the half light left by the sun as it skimmed the edge of the horizon.

The next day, March 20, it stopped snowing.

The cold was a little more brisk.

The thermometer marked -2 degrees centigrade.

The mist had cleared, and on that day I hoped our noon sights could be accomplished.

Since Captain Nemo hadn't yet appeared, only Conseil and I were taken ashore by the skiff.

The soil's nature was still the same: volcanic.

Traces of lava, slag, and basaltic rock were everywhere, but I couldn't find the crater that had vomited them up.

There as yonder, myriads of birds enlivened this part of the polar continent.

But they had to share their dominion with huge herds of marine mammals that looked at us with gentle eyes.

These were seals of various species, some stretched out on the ground, others lying on drifting ice floes, several leaving or reentering the sea.

Having never dealt with man, they didn't run off at our approach, and I counted enough of them thereabouts to provision a couple hundred ships.

"Ye gods,"

Conseil said, "it's fortunate that Ned Land didn't come with us!"

"Why so, Conseil?"

"Because that madcap hunter would kill every animal here."

"Every animal may be overstating it, but in truth I doubt we could keep our Canadian friend from harpooning some of these magnificent cetaceans.

Which would be an affront to Captain Nemo, since he hates to slay harmless beasts needlessly."

"He's right."

"Certainly, Conseil.

But tell me, haven't you finished classifying these superb specimens of marine fauna?"

"Master is well aware,"

Conseil replied, "that I'm not seasoned in practical application.

When master has told me these animals' names .

.

."

"They're seals and walruses."

"Two genera,"

our scholarly Conseil hastened to say, "that belong to the family Pinnipedia, order Carnivora, group Unguiculata, subclass Monodelphia, class Mammalia, branch Vertebrata."

"Very nice, Conseil,"

I replied, "but these two genera of seals and walruses are each divided into species, and if I'm not mistaken, we now have a chance to actually look at them.

Let's."

It was eight o'clock in the morning.

We had four hours to ourselves before the sun could be productively observed.

I guided our steps toward a huge bay that made a crescent-shaped incision in the granite cliffs along the beach.

There, all about us, I swear that the shores and ice floes were crowded with marine mammals as far as the eye could see, and I involuntarily looked around for old Proteus, that mythological shepherd who guarded King Neptune's immense flocks.

To be specific, these were seals.

They formed distinct male-and-female groups, the father watching over his family, the mother suckling her little ones, the stronger youngsters emancipated a few paces away.

When these mammals wanted to relocate, they moved in little jumps made by contracting their bodies, clumsily helped by their imperfectly developed flippers, which, as with their manatee relatives, form actual forearms.

In the water, their ideal element, I must say these animals swim wonderfully thanks to their flexible backbones, narrow pelvises, close-cropped hair, and webbed feet.

Resting on shore, they assumed extremely graceful positions.

Consequently, their gentle features, their sensitive expressions equal to those of the loveliest women, their soft, limpid eyes, their charming poses, led the ancients to glorify them by metamorphosing the males into sea gods and the females into mermaids.

I drew Conseil's attention to the considerable growth of the cerebral lobes found in these intelligent cetaceans.

No mammal except man has more abundant cerebral matter.

Accordingly, seals are quite capable of being educated; they make good pets, and together with certain other naturalists, I think these animals can be properly trained to perform yeoman service as hunting dogs for fishermen.

Most of these seals were sleeping on the rocks or the sand.

Among those properly termed seals--which have no external ears, unlike sea lions whose ears protrude--I observed several varieties of the species stenorhynchus, three meters long, with white hair, bulldog heads, and armed with ten teeth in each jaw: four incisors in both the upper and lower, plus two big canines shaped like the fleur-de-lis.

Among them slithered some sea elephants, a type of seal with a short, flexible trunk; these are the giants of the species, with a circumference of twenty feet and a length of ten meters.

They didn't move as we approached.

"Are these animals dangerous?"

Conseil asked me.

"Only if they're attacked,"

I replied.

"But when these giant seals defend their little ones, their fury is dreadful, and it isn't rare for them to smash a fisherman's longboat to bits."

"They're within their rights,"

Conseil answered.

"I don't say nay."

Two miles farther on, we were stopped by a promontory that screened the bay from southerly winds.

It dropped straight down to the sea, and surf foamed against it.

From beyond this ridge there came fearsome bellows, such as a herd of cattle might produce.

"Gracious,"

Conseil put in, "a choir of bulls?"

"No,"

I said, "a choir of walruses."

"Are they fighting with each other?"

"Either fighting or playing."

"With all due respect to master, this we must see."

"Then see it we must, Conseil."

And there we were, climbing these blackish rocks amid sudden landslides and over stones slippery with ice.

More than once I took a tumble at the expense of my backside.

Conseil, more cautious or more stable, barely faltered and would help me up, saying: "If master's legs would kindly adopt a wider stance, master will keep his balance."

Arriving at the topmost ridge of this promontory, I could see vast white plains covered with walruses.

These animals were playing among themselves.

They were howling not in anger but in glee.

Walruses resemble seals in the shape of their bodies and the arrangement of their limbs.

But their lower jaws lack canines and incisors, and as for their upper canines, they consist of two tusks eighty centimeters long with a circumference of thirty-three centimeters at the socket.

Made of solid ivory, without striations, harder than elephant tusks, and less prone to yellowing, these teeth are in great demand.

Accordingly, walruses are the victims of a mindless hunting that soon will destroy them all, since their hunters indiscriminately slaughter pregnant females and youngsters, and over 4,000 individuals are destroyed annually.

Passing near these unusual animals, I could examine them at my leisure since they didn't stir.

Their hides were rough and heavy, a tan color leaning toward a reddish brown; their coats were short and less than abundant.

Some were four meters long.

More tranquil and less fearful than their northern relatives, they posted no sentinels on guard duty at the approaches to their campsite.

After examining this community of walruses, I decided to return in my tracks.

It was eleven o'clock, and if Captain Nemo found conditions favorable for taking his sights, I wanted to be present at the operation.

But I held no hopes that the sun would make an appearance that day.

It was hidden from our eyes by clouds squeezed together on the horizon.

Apparently the jealous orb didn't want to reveal this inaccessible spot on the globe to any human being.

Yet I decided to return to the Nautilus.

We went along a steep, narrow path that ran over the cliff's summit.

By 11:30 we had arrived at our landing place.

The beached skiff had brought the captain ashore.

I spotted him standing on a chunk of basalt.

His instruments were beside him.

His eyes were focused on the northern horizon, along which the sun was sweeping in its extended arc.

I found a place near him and waited without speaking.

Noon arrived, and just as on the day before, the sun didn't put in an appearance.

It was sheer bad luck.

Our noon sights were still lacking.

If we couldn't obtain them tomorrow, we would finally have to give up any hope of fixing our position.

In essence, it was precisely March 20.

Tomorrow, the 21st, was the day of the equinox; the sun would disappear below the horizon for six months not counting refraction, and after its disappearance the long polar night would begin.

Following the September equinox, the sun had emerged above the northerly horizon, rising in long spirals until December 21.

At that time, the summer solstice of these southernmost districts, the sun had started back down, and tomorrow it would cast its last rays.

I shared my thoughts and fears with Captain Nemo.

"You're right, Professor Aronnax,"

he told me.

"If I can't take the sun's altitude tomorrow, I won't be able to try again for another six months.

But precisely because sailors' luck has led me into these seas on March 21, it will be easy to get our bearings if the noonday sun does appear before our eyes."

"Why easy, captain?"

"Because when the orb of day sweeps in such long spirals, it's difficult to measure its exact altitude above the horizon, and our instruments are open to committing serious errors."

"Then what can you do?"

"I use only my chronometer,"

Captain Nemo answered me.

"At noon tomorrow, March 21, if, after accounting for refraction, the sun's disk is cut exactly in half by the northern horizon, that will mean I'm at the South Pole."

"Right,"

I said.

"Nevertheless, it isn't mathematically exact proof, because the equinox needn't fall precisely at noon."

"No doubt, sir, but the error will be under 100 meters, and that's close enough for us.

Until tomorrow then."

Captain Nemo went back on board.

Conseil and I stayed behind until five o'clock, surveying the beach, observing and studying.

The only unusual object I picked up was an auk's egg of remarkable size, for which a collector would have paid more than 1,000 francs.

Its cream-colored tint, plus the streaks and markings that decorated it like so many hieroglyphics, made it a rare trinket.

I placed it in Conseil's hands, and holding it like precious porcelain from China, that cautious, sure-footed lad got it back to the Nautilus in one piece.

There I put this rare egg inside one of the glass cases in the museum.

I ate supper, feasting with appetite on an excellent piece of seal liver whose flavor reminded me of pork.

Then I went to bed; but not without praying, like a good Hindu, for the favors of the radiant orb.

The next day, March 21, bright and early at five o'clock in the morning, I climbed onto the platform.

I found Captain Nemo there.

"The weather is clearing a bit,"

he told me.

"I have high hopes.

After breakfast we'll make our way ashore and choose an observation post."

This issue settled, I went to find Ned Land.

I wanted to take him with me.

The obstinate Canadian refused, and I could clearly see that his tight-lipped mood and his bad temper were growing by the day.

Under the circumstances I ultimately wasn't sorry that he refused.

In truth, there were too many seals ashore, and it would never do to expose this impulsive fisherman to such temptations.

Breakfast over, I made my way ashore.

The Nautilus had gone a few more miles during the night.

It lay well out, a good league from the coast, which was crowned by a sharp peak 400 to 500 meters high.

In addition to me, the skiff carried Captain Nemo, two crewmen, and the instruments--in other words, a chronometer, a spyglass, and a barometer.

During our crossing I saw numerous baleen whales belonging to the three species unique to these southernmost seas: the bowhead whale (or "right whale,"

according to the English), which has no dorsal fin; the humpback whale from the genus Balaenoptera (in other words, "winged whales"), beasts with wrinkled bellies and huge whitish fins that, genus name regardless, do not yet form wings; and the finback whale, yellowish brown, the swiftest of all cetaceans.

This powerful animal is audible from far away when it sends up towering spouts of air and steam that resemble swirls of smoke.

Herds of these different mammals were playing about in the tranquil waters, and I could easily see that this Antarctic polar basin now served as a refuge for those cetaceans too relentlessly pursued by hunters.

I also noted long, whitish strings of salps, a type of mollusk found in clusters, and some jellyfish of large size that swayed in the eddies of the billows.

By nine o'clock we had pulled up to shore.

The sky was growing brighter.

Clouds were fleeing to the south.

Mists were rising from the cold surface of the water.

Captain Nemo headed toward the peak, which he no doubt planned to make his observatory.

It was an arduous climb over sharp lava and pumice stones in the midst of air often reeking with sulfurous fumes from the smoke holes.

For a man out of practice at treading land, the captain scaled the steepest slopes with a supple agility I couldn't equal, and which would have been envied by hunters of Pyrenees mountain goats.

It took us two hours to reach the summit of this half-crystal, half-basalt peak.

From there our eyes scanned a vast sea, which scrawled its boundary line firmly against the background of the northern sky.

At our feet: dazzling tracts of white.

Over our heads: a pale azure, clear of mists.

North of us: the sun's disk, like a ball of fire already cut into by the edge of the horizon.

From the heart of the waters: jets of liquid rising like hundreds of magnificent bouquets.

Far off, like a sleeping cetacean: the Nautilus.

Behind us to the south and east: an immense shore, a chaotic heap of rocks and ice whose limits we couldn't see.

Arriving at the summit of this peak, Captain Nemo carefully determined its elevation by means of his barometer, since he had to take this factor into account in his noon sights.

At 11:45 the sun, by then seen only by refraction, looked like a golden disk, dispersing its last rays over this deserted continent and down to these seas not yet plowed by the ships of man.

Captain Nemo had brought a spyglass with a reticular eyepiece, which corrected the sun's refraction by means of a mirror, and he used it to observe the orb sinking little by little along a very extended diagonal that reached below the horizon.

I held the chronometer.

My heart was pounding mightily.

If the lower half of the sun's disk disappeared just as the chronometer said noon, we were right at the pole.

"Noon!"

I called.

"The South Pole!"

Captain Nemo replied in a solemn voice, handing me the spyglass, which showed the orb of day cut into two exactly equal parts by the horizon.

I stared at the last rays wreathing this peak, while shadows were gradually climbing its gradients.

Just then, resting his hand on my shoulder, Captain Nemo said to me: "In 1600, sir, the Dutchman Gheritk was swept by storms and currents, reaching latitude 64 degrees south and discovering the South Shetland Islands.

On January 17, 1773, the famous Captain Cook went along the 38th meridian, arriving at latitude 67 degrees 30'; and on January 30, 1774, along the 109th meridian, he reached latitude 71 degrees 15'.

In 1819 the Russian Bellinghausen lay on the 69th parallel, and in 1821 on the 66th at longitude 111 degrees west.

In 1820 the Englishman Bransfield stopped at 65 degrees.

That same year the American Morrel, whose reports are dubious, went along the 42nd meridian, finding open sea at latitude 70 degrees 14'.

In 1825 the Englishman Powell was unable to get beyond 62 degrees.

That same year a humble seal fisherman, the Englishman Weddell, went as far as latitude 72 degrees 14' on the 35th meridian, and as far as 74 degrees 15' on the 36th.

In 1829 the Englishman Forster, commander of the Chanticleer, laid claim to the Antarctic continent in latitude 63 degrees 26' and longitude 66 degrees 26'.

On February 1, 1831, the Englishman Biscoe discovered Enderby Land at latitude 68 degrees 50', Adelaide Land at latitude 67 degrees on February 5, 1832, and Graham Land at latitude 64 degrees 45' on February 21.

In 1838 the Frenchman Dumont d'Urville stopped at the Ice Bank in latitude 62 degrees 57', sighting the Louis-Philippe Peninsula; on January 21 two years later, at a new southerly position of 66 degrees 30', he named the Adlie Coast and eight days later, the Clarie Coast at 64 degrees 40'.

In 1838 the American Wilkes advanced as far as the 69th parallel on the 100th meridian.

In 1839 the Englishman Balleny discovered the Sabrina Coast at the edge of the polar circle.

Lastly, on January 12, 1842, with his ships, the Erebus and the Terror, the Englishman Sir James Clark Ross found Victoria Land in latitude 70 degrees 56' and longitude 171 degrees 7' east; on the 23rd of that same month, he reached the 74th parallel, a position denoting the Farthest South attained until then; on the 27th he lay at 76 degrees 8'; on the 28th at 77 degrees 32'; on February 2 at 78 degrees 4'; and late in 1842 he returned to 71 degrees but couldn't get beyond it.

Well now!

In 1868, on this 21st day of March, I myself, Captain Nemo, have reached the South Pole at 90 degrees, and I hereby claim this entire part of the globe, equal to one-sixth of the known continents."

"In the name of which sovereign, captain?"

"In my own name, sir!"

So saying, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag bearing a gold "N"

on its quartered bunting.

Then, turning toward the orb of day, whose last rays were licking at the sea's horizon: "Farewell, O sun!"

he called.

"Disappear, O radiant orb!

Retire beneath this open sea, and let six months of night spread their shadows over my new domains!"

Accident or Incident?

THE NEXT DAY, March 22, at six o'clock in the morning, preparations for departure began.

The last gleams of twilight were melting into night.

The cold was brisk.

The constellations were glittering with startling intensity.

The wonderful Southern Cross, polar star of the Antarctic regions, twinkled at its zenith.

The thermometer marked -12 degrees centigrade, and a fresh breeze left a sharp nip in the air.

Ice floes were increasing over the open water.

The sea was starting to congeal everywhere.

Numerous blackish patches were spreading over its surface, announcing the imminent formation of fresh ice.

Obviously this southernmost basin froze over during its six-month winter and became utterly inaccessible.

What happened to the whales during this period?

No doubt they went beneath the Ice Bank to find more feasible seas.

As for seals and walruses, they were accustomed to living in the harshest climates and stayed on in these icy waterways.

These animals know by instinct how to gouge holes in the ice fields and keep them continually open; they go to these holes to breathe.

Once the birds have migrated northward to escape the cold, these marine mammals remain as sole lords of the polar continent.

Meanwhile the ballast tanks filled with water and the Nautilus sank slowly.

At a depth of 1,000 feet, it stopped.

Its propeller churned the waves and it headed due north at a speed of fifteen miles per hour.

Near the afternoon it was already cruising under the immense frozen carapace of the Ice Bank.

As a precaution, the panels in the lounge stayed closed, because the Nautilus's hull could run afoul of some submerged block of ice.

So I spent the day putting my notes into final form.

My mind was completely wrapped up in my memories of the pole.

We had reached that inaccessible spot without facing exhaustion or danger, as if our seagoing passenger carriage had glided there on railroad tracks.

And now we had actually started our return journey.

Did it still have comparable surprises in store for me?

I felt sure it did, so inexhaustible is this series of underwater wonders!

As it was, in the five and a half months since fate had brought us on board, we had cleared 14,000 leagues, and over this track longer than the earth's equator, so many fascinating or frightening incidents had beguiled our voyage: that hunting trip in the Crespo forests, our running aground in the Torres Strait, the coral cemetery, the pearl fisheries of Ceylon, the Arabic tunnel, the fires of Santorini, those millions in the Bay of Vigo, Atlantis, the South Pole!

During the night all these memories crossed over from one dream to the next, not giving my brain a moment's rest.

At three o'clock in the morning, I was awakened by a violent collision.

I sat up in bed, listening in the darkness, and then was suddenly hurled into the middle of my stateroom.

Apparently the Nautilus had gone aground, then heeled over sharply.

Leaning against the walls, I dragged myself down the gangways to the lounge, whose ceiling lights were on.

The furniture had been knocked over.

Fortunately the glass cases were solidly secured at the base and had stood fast.

Since we were no longer vertical, the starboard pictures were glued to the tapestries, while those to port had their lower edges hanging a foot away from the wall.

So the Nautilus was lying on its starboard side, completely stationary to boot.

In its interior I heard the sound of footsteps and muffled voices.

But Captain Nemo didn't appear.

Just as I was about to leave the lounge, Ned Land and Conseil entered.

"What happened?"

I instantly said to them.

"I came to ask master that,"

Conseil replied.

"Damnation!"

the Canadian exclaimed.

"I know full well what happened!

The Nautilus has gone aground, and judging from the way it's listing, I don't think it'll pull through like that first time in the Torres Strait."

"But,"

I asked, "are we at least back on the surface of the sea?"

"We have no idea,"

Conseil replied.

"It's easy to find out,"

I answered.

I consulted the pressure gauge.

Much to my surprise, it indicated a depth of 360 meters.

"What's the meaning of this?"

I exclaimed.

"We must confer with Captain Nemo,"

Conseil said.

"But where do we find him?"

Ned Land asked.

"Follow me,"

I told my two companions.

We left the lounge.

Nobody in the library.

Nobody by the central companionway or the crew's quarters.

I assumed that Captain Nemo was stationed in the pilothouse.

Best to wait.

The three of us returned to the lounge.

I'll skip over the Canadian's complaints.

He had good grounds for an outburst.

I didn't answer him back, letting him blow off all the steam he wanted.

We had been left to ourselves for twenty minutes, trying to detect the tiniest noises inside the Nautilus, when Captain Nemo entered.

He didn't seem to see us.

His facial features, usually so emotionless, revealed a certain uneasiness.

He studied the compass and pressure gauge in silence, then went and put his finger on the world map at a spot in the sector depicting the southernmost seas.

I hesitated to interrupt him.

But some moments later, when he turned to me, I threw back at him a phrase he had used in the Torres Strait: "An incident, captain?"

"No, sir,"

he replied, "this time an accident."

"Serious?"

"Perhaps."

"Is there any immediate danger?"

"No."

"The Nautilus has run aground?"

"Yes."

"And this accident came about .

.

.

?"

"Through nature's unpredictability not man's incapacity.

No errors were committed in our maneuvers.

Nevertheless, we can't prevent a loss of balance from taking its toll.

One may defy human laws, but no one can withstand the laws of nature."

Captain Nemo had picked an odd time to philosophize.

All in all, this reply told me nothing.

"May I learn, sir,"

I asked him, "what caused this accident?"

"An enormous block of ice, an entire mountain, has toppled over,"

he answered me.

"When an iceberg is eroded at the base by warmer waters or by repeated collisions, its center of gravity rises.

Then it somersaults, it turns completely upside down.

That's what happened here.

When it overturned, one of these blocks hit the Nautilus as it was cruising under the waters.

Sliding under our hull, this block then raised us with irresistible power, lifting us into less congested strata where we now lie on our side."

"But can't we float the Nautilus clear by emptying its ballast tanks, to regain our balance?"

"That, sir, is being done right now.

You can hear the pumps working.

Look at the needle on the pressure gauge.

It indicates that the Nautilus is rising, but this block of ice is rising with us, and until some obstacle halts its upward movement, our position won't change."

Indeed, the Nautilus kept the same heel to starboard.

No doubt it would straighten up once the block came to a halt.

But before that happened, who knew if we might not hit the underbelly of the Ice Bank and be hideously squeezed between two frozen surfaces?

I mused on all the consequences of this situation.

Captain Nemo didn't stop studying the pressure gauge.

Since the toppling of this iceberg, the Nautilus had risen about 150 feet, but it still stayed at the same angle to the perpendicular.

Suddenly a slight movement could be felt over the hull.

Obviously the Nautilus was straightening a bit.

Objects hanging in the lounge were visibly returning to their normal positions.

The walls were approaching the vertical.

Nobody said a word.

Hearts pounding, we could see and feel the ship righting itself.

The floor was becoming horizontal beneath our feet.

Ten minutes went by.

"Finally, we're upright!"

I exclaimed.

"Yes,"

Captain Nemo said, heading to the lounge door.

"But will we float off?"

I asked him.

"Certainly,"

he replied, "since the ballast tanks aren't yet empty, and when they are, the Nautilus must rise to the surface of the sea."

The captain went out, and soon I saw that at his orders, the Nautilus had halted its upward movement.

In fact, it soon would have hit the underbelly of the Ice Bank, but it had stopped in time and was floating in midwater.

"That was a close call!"

Conseil then said.

"Yes.

We could have been crushed between these masses of ice, or at least imprisoned between them.

And then, with no way to renew our air supply.

.

.

.

Yes, that was a close call!"

"If it's over with!"

Ned Land muttered.

I was unwilling to get into a pointless argument with the Canadian and didn't reply.

Moreover, the panels opened just then, and the outside light burst through the uncovered windows.

We were fully afloat, as I have said; but on both sides of the Nautilus, about ten meters away, there rose dazzling walls of ice.

There also were walls above and below.

Above, because the Ice Bank's underbelly spread over us like an immense ceiling.

Below, because the somersaulting block, shifting little by little, had found points of purchase on both side walls and had gotten jammed between them.

The Nautilus was imprisoned in a genuine tunnel of ice about twenty meters wide and filled with quiet water.

So the ship could easily exit by going either ahead or astern, sinking a few hundred meters deeper, and then taking an open passageway beneath the Ice Bank.

The ceiling lights were off, yet the lounge was still brightly lit.

This was due to the reflecting power of the walls of ice, which threw the beams of our beacon right back at us.

Words cannot describe the effects produced by our galvanic rays on these huge, whimsically sculpted blocks, whose every angle, ridge, and facet gave off a different glow depending on the nature of the veins running inside the ice.

It was a dazzling mine of gems, in particular sapphires and emeralds, whose jets of blue and green crisscrossed.

Here and there, opaline hues of infinite subtlety raced among sparks of light that were like so many fiery diamonds, their brilliance more than any eye could stand.

The power of our beacon was increased a hundredfold, like a lamp shining through the biconvex lenses of a world-class lighthouse.

"How beautiful!"

Conseil exclaimed.

"Yes,"

I said, "it's a wonderful sight!

Isn't it, Ned?"

"Oh damnation, yes!"

Ned Land shot back.

"It's superb!

I'm furious that I have to admit it.

Nobody has ever seen the like.

But this sight could cost us dearly.

And in all honesty, I think we're looking at things God never intended for human eyes."

Ned was right.

It was too beautiful.

All at once a yell from Conseil made me turn around.

"What is it?"

I asked.

"Master must close his eyes!

Master mustn't look!"

With that, Conseil clapped his hands over his eyes.

"But what's wrong, my boy?"

"I've been dazzled, struck blind!"

Involuntarily my eyes flew to the window, but I couldn't stand the fire devouring it.

I realized what had happened.

The Nautilus had just started off at great speed.

All the tranquil glimmers of the ice walls had then changed into blazing streaks.

The sparkles from these myriads of diamonds were merging with each other.

Swept along by its propeller, the Nautilus was traveling through a sheath of flashing light.

Then the panels in the lounge closed.

We kept our hands over our eyes, which were utterly saturated with those concentric gleams that swirl before the retina when sunlight strikes it too intensely.

It took some time to calm our troubled vision.

Finally we lowered our hands.

"Ye gods, I never would have believed it,"

Conseil said.

"And I still don't believe it!"

the Canadian shot back.

"When we return to shore, jaded from all these natural wonders,"

Conseil added, "think how we'll look down on those pitiful land masses, those puny works of man!

No, the civilized world won't be good enough for us!"

Such words from the lips of this emotionless Flemish boy showed that our enthusiasm was near the boiling point.

But the Canadian didn't fail to throw his dram of cold water over us.

"The civilized world!"

he said, shaking his head.

"Don't worry, Conseil my friend, we're never going back to that world!"

By this point it was five o'clock in the morning.

Just then there was a collision in the Nautilus's bow.

I realized that its spur had just bumped a block of ice.

It must have been a faulty maneuver because this underwater tunnel was obstructed by such blocks and didn't make for easy navigating.

So I had assumed that Captain Nemo, in adjusting his course, would go around each obstacle or would hug the walls and follow the windings of the tunnel.

In either case our forward motion wouldn't receive an absolute check.

Nevertheless, contrary to my expectations, the Nautilus definitely began to move backward.

"We're going astern?"

Conseil said.

"Yes,"

I replied.

"Apparently the tunnel has no way out at this end."

"And so .

.

.

?"

"So,"

I said, "our maneuvers are quite simple.

We'll return in our tracks and go out the southern opening.

That's all."

As I spoke, I tried to sound more confident than I really felt.

Meanwhile the Nautilus accelerated its backward movement, and running with propeller in reverse, it swept us along at great speed.

"This'll mean a delay,"

Ned said.

"What are a few hours more or less, so long as we get out."

"Yes,"

Ned Land repeated, "so long as we get out!"

I strolled for a little while from the lounge into the library.

My companions kept their seats and didn't move.

Soon I threw myself down on a couch and picked up a book, which my eyes skimmed mechanically.

A quarter of an hour later, Conseil approached me, saying: "Is it deeply fascinating, this volume master is reading?"

"Tremendously fascinating,"

I replied.

"I believe it.

Master is reading his own book!"

"My own book?"

Indeed, my hands were holding my own work on the great ocean depths.

I hadn't even suspected.

I closed the book and resumed my strolling.

Ned and Conseil stood up to leave.

"Stay here, my friends,"

I said, stopping them.

"Let's stay together until we're out of this blind alley."

"As master wishes,"

Conseil replied.

The hours passed.

I often studied the instruments hanging on the lounge wall.

The pressure gauge indicated that the Nautilus stayed at a constant depth of 300 meters, the compass that it kept heading south, the log that it was traveling at a speed of twenty miles per hour, an excessive speed in such a cramped area.

But Captain Nemo knew that by this point there was no such thing as too fast, since minutes were now worth centuries.

At 8:25 a second collision took place.

This time astern.

I grew pale.

My companions came over.

I clutched Conseil's hand.

Our eyes questioned each other, and more directly than if our thoughts had been translated into words.

Just then the captain entered the lounge.

I went to him.

"Our path is barred to the south?"

I asked him.

"Yes, sir.

When it overturned, that iceberg closed off every exit."

"We're boxed in?"

"Yes."

Shortage of Air CONSEQUENTLY, above, below, and around the Nautilus, there were impenetrable frozen walls.

We were the Ice Bank's prisoners!

The Canadian banged a table with his fearsome fist.

Conseil kept still.

I stared at the captain.

His face had resumed its usual emotionlessness.

He crossed his arms.

He pondered.

The Nautilus did not stir.

The captain then broke into speech: "Gentlemen,"

he said in a calm voice, "there are two ways of dying under the conditions in which we're placed."

This inexplicable individual acted like a mathematics professor working out a problem for his pupils.

"The first way,"

he went on, "is death by crushing.

The second is death by asphyxiation.

I don't mention the possibility of death by starvation because the Nautilus's provisions will certainly last longer than we will.

Therefore, let's concentrate on our chances of being crushed or asphyxiated."

"As for asphyxiation, captain,"

I replied, "that isn't a cause for alarm, because the air tanks are full."

"True,"

Captain Nemo went on, "but they'll supply air for only two days.

Now then, we've been buried beneath the waters for thirty-six hours, and the Nautilus's heavy atmosphere already needs renewing.

In another forty-eight hours, our reserve air will be used up."

"Well then, captain, let's free ourselves within forty-eight hours!"

"We'll try to at least, by cutting through one of these walls surrounding us."

"Which one?"

I asked.

"Borings will tell us that.

I'm going to ground the Nautilus on the lower shelf, then my men will put on their diving suits and attack the thinnest of these ice walls."

"Can the panels in the lounge be left open?"

"Without ill effect.

We're no longer in motion."

Captain Nemo went out.

Hissing sounds soon told me that water was being admitted into the ballast tanks.

The Nautilus slowly settled and rested on the icy bottom at a depth of 350 meters, the depth at which the lower shelf of ice lay submerged.

"My friends,"

I said, "we're in a serious predicament, but I'm counting on your courage and energy."

"Sir,"

the Canadian replied, "this is no time to bore you with my complaints.

I'm ready to do anything I can for the common good."

"Excellent, Ned,"

I said, extending my hand to the Canadian.

"I might add,"

he went on, "that I'm as handy with a pick as a harpoon.

If I can be helpful to the captain, he can use me any way he wants."

"He won't turn down your assistance.

Come along, Ned."

I led the Canadian to the room where the Nautilus's men were putting on their diving suits.

I informed the captain of Ned's proposition, which was promptly accepted.

The Canadian got into his underwater costume and was ready as soon as his fellow workers.

Each of them carried on his back a Rouquayrol device that the air tanks had supplied with a generous allowance of fresh oxygen.

A considerable but necessary drain on the Nautilus's reserves.

As for the Ruhmkorff lamps, they were unnecessary in the midst of these brilliant waters saturated with our electric rays.

After Ned was dressed, I reentered the lounge, whose windows had been uncovered; stationed next to Conseil, I examined the strata surrounding and supporting the Nautilus.

Some moments later, we saw a dozen crewmen set foot on the shelf of ice, among them Ned Land, easily recognized by his tall figure.

Captain Nemo was with them.

Before digging into the ice, the captain had to obtain borings, to insure working in the best direction.

Long bores were driven into the side walls; but after fifteen meters, the instruments were still impeded by the thickness of those walls.

It was futile to attack the ceiling since that surface was the Ice Bank itself, more than 400 meters high.

Captain Nemo then bored into the lower surface.

There we were separated from the sea by a ten-meter barrier.

That's how thick the iceberg was.

From this point on, it was an issue of cutting out a piece equal in surface area to the Nautilus's waterline.

This meant detaching about 6,500 cubic meters, to dig a hole through which the ship could descend below this tract of ice.

Work began immediately and was carried on with tireless tenacity.

Instead of digging all around the Nautilus, which would have entailed even greater difficulties, Captain Nemo had an immense trench outlined on the ice, eight meters from our port quarter.

Then his men simultaneously staked it off at several points around its circumference.

Soon their picks were vigorously attacking this compact matter, and huge chunks were loosened from its mass.

These chunks weighed less than the water, and by an unusual effect of specific gravity, each chunk took wing, as it were, to the roof of the tunnel, which thickened above by as much as it diminished below.

But this hardly mattered so long as the lower surface kept growing thinner.

After two hours of energetic work, Ned Land reentered, exhausted.

He and his companions were replaced by new workmen, including Conseil and me.

The Nautilus's chief officer supervised us.

The water struck me as unusually cold, but I warmed up promptly while wielding my pick.

My movements were quite free, although they were executed under a pressure of thirty atmospheres.

After two hours of work, reentering to snatch some food and rest, I found a noticeable difference between the clean elastic fluid supplied me by the Rouquayrol device and the Nautilus's atmosphere, which was already charged with carbon dioxide.

The air hadn't been renewed in forty-eight hours, and its life-giving qualities were considerably weakened.

Meanwhile, after twelve hours had gone by, we had removed from the outlined surface area a slice of ice only one meter thick, hence about 600 cubic meters.

Assuming the same work would be accomplished every twelve hours, it would still take five nights and four days to see the undertaking through to completion.

"Five nights and four days!"

I told my companions.

"And we have oxygen in the air tanks for only two days."

"Without taking into account,"

Ned answered, "that once we're out of this damned prison, we'll still be cooped up beneath the Ice Bank, without any possible contact with the open air!"

An apt remark.

For who could predict the minimum time we would need to free ourselves?

Before the Nautilus could return to the surface of the waves, couldn't we all die of asphyxiation?

Were this ship and everyone on board doomed to perish in this tomb of ice?

It was a dreadful state of affairs.

But we faced it head-on, each one of us determined to do his duty to the end.

During the night, in line with my forecasts, a new one-meter slice was removed from this immense socket.

But in the morning, wearing my diving suit, I was crossing through the liquid mass in a temperature of -6 degrees to -7 degrees centigrade, when I noted that little by little the side walls were closing in on each other.

The liquid strata farthest from the trench, not warmed by the movements of workmen and tools, were showing a tendency to solidify.

In the face of this imminent new danger, what would happen to our chances for salvation, and how could we prevent this liquid medium from solidifying, then cracking the Nautilus's hull like glass?

I didn't tell my two companions about this new danger.

There was no point in dampening the energy they were putting into our arduous rescue work.

But when I returned on board, I mentioned this serious complication to Captain Nemo.

"I know,"

he told me in that calm tone the most dreadful outlook couldn't change.

"It's one more danger, but I don't know any way of warding it off.

Our sole chance for salvation is to work faster than the water solidifies.

We've got to get there first, that's all."

Get there first!

By then I should have been used to this type of talk!

For several hours that day, I wielded my pick doggedly.

The work kept me going.

Besides, working meant leaving the Nautilus, which meant breathing the clean oxygen drawn from the air tanks and supplied by our equipment, which meant leaving the thin, foul air behind.

Near evening one more meter had been dug from the trench.

When I returned on board, I was wellnigh asphyxiated by the carbon dioxide saturating the air.

Oh, if only we had the chemical methods that would enable us to drive out this noxious gas!

There was no lack of oxygen.

All this water contained a considerable amount, and after it was decomposed by our powerful batteries, this life-giving elastic fluid could have been restored to us.

I had thought it all out, but to no avail because the carbon dioxide produced by our breathing permeated every part of the ship.

To absorb it, we would need to fill containers with potassium hydroxide and shake them continually.

But this substance was missing on board and nothing else could replace it.

That evening Captain Nemo was forced to open the spigots of his air tanks and shoot a few spouts of fresh oxygen through the Nautilus's interior.

Without this precaution we wouldn't have awakened the following morning.

The next day, March 26, I returned to my miner's trade, working to remove the fifth meter.

The Ice Bank's side walls and underbelly had visibly thickened.

Obviously they would come together before the Nautilus could break free.

For an instant I was gripped by despair.

My pick nearly slipped from my hands.

What was the point of this digging if I was to die smothered and crushed by this water turning to stone, a torture undreamed of by even the wildest savages!

I felt like I was lying in the jaws of a fearsome monster, jaws irresistibly closing.

Supervising our work, working himself, Captain Nemo passed near me just then.

I touched him with my hand and pointed to the walls of our prison.

The starboard wall had moved forward to a point less than four meters from the Nautilus's hull.

The captain understood and gave me a signal to follow him.

We returned on board.

My diving suit removed, I went with him to the lounge.

"Professor Aronnax,"

he told me, "this calls for heroic measures, or we'll be sealed up in this solidified water as if it were cement."

"Yes!"

I said.

"But what can we do?"

"Oh,"

he exclaimed, "if only my Nautilus were strong enough to stand that much pressure without being crushed!"

"Well?"

I asked, not catching the captain's meaning.

"Don't you understand,"

he went on, "that the congealing of this water could come to our rescue?

Don't you see that by solidifying, it could burst these tracts of ice imprisoning us, just as its freezing can burst the hardest stones?

Aren't you aware that this force could be the instrument of our salvation rather than our destruction?"

"Yes, captain, maybe so.

But whatever resistance to crushing the Nautilus may have, it still couldn't stand such dreadful pressures, and it would be squashed as flat as a piece of sheet iron."

"I know it, sir.

So we can't rely on nature to rescue us, only our own efforts.

We must counteract this solidification.

We must hold it in check.

Not only are the side walls closing in, but there aren't ten feet of water ahead or astern of the Nautilus.

All around us, this freeze is gaining fast."

"How long,"

I asked, "will the oxygen in the air tanks enable us to breathe on board?"

The captain looked me straight in the eye.

"After tomorrow,"

he said, "the air tanks will be empty!"

I broke out in a cold sweat.

But why should I have been startled by this reply?

On March 22 the Nautilus had dived under the open waters at the pole.

It was now the 26th.

We had lived off the ship's stores for five days!

And all remaining breathable air had to be saved for the workmen.

Even today as I write these lines, my sensations are so intense that an involuntary terror sweeps over me, and my lungs still seem short of air!

Meanwhile, motionless and silent, Captain Nemo stood lost in thought.

An idea visibly crossed his mind.

But he seemed to brush it aside.

He told himself no.

At last these words escaped his lips: "Boiling water!"

he muttered.

"Boiling water?"

I exclaimed.

"Yes, sir.

We're shut up in a relatively confined area.

If the Nautilus's pumps continually injected streams of boiling water into this space, wouldn't that raise its temperature and delay its freezing?"

"It's worth trying!"

I said resolutely.

"So let's try it, professor."

By then the thermometer gave -7 degrees centigrade outside.

Captain Nemo led me to the galley where a huge distilling mechanism was at work, supplying drinking water via evaporation.

The mechanism was loaded with water, and the full electric heat of our batteries was thrown into coils awash in liquid.

In a few minutes the water reached 100 degrees centigrade.

It was sent to the pumps while new water replaced it in the process.

The heat generated by our batteries was so intense that after simply going through the mechanism, water drawn cold from the sea arrived boiling hot at the body of the pump.

The steaming water was injected into the icy water outside, and after three hours had passed, the thermometer gave the exterior temperature as -6 degrees centigrade.

That was one degree gained.

Two hours later the thermometer gave only -4 degrees.

After I monitored the operation's progress, double-checking it with many inspections, I told the captain, "It's working."

"I think so,"

he answered me.

"We've escaped being crushed.

Now we have only asphyxiation to fear."

During the night the water temperature rose to -1 degrees centigrade.

The injections couldn't get it to go a single degree higher.

But since salt water freezes only at -2 degrees, I was finally assured that there was no danger of it solidifying.

By the next day, March 27, six meters of ice had been torn from the socket.

Only four meters were left to be removed.

That still meant forty-eight hours of work.

The air couldn't be renewed in the Nautilus's interior.

Accordingly, that day it kept getting worse.

An unbearable heaviness weighed me down.

Near three o'clock in the afternoon, this agonizing sensation affected me to an intense degree.

Yawns dislocated my jaws.

My lungs were gasping in their quest for that enkindling elastic fluid required for breathing, now growing scarcer and scarcer.

My mind was in a daze.

I lay outstretched, strength gone, nearly unconscious.

My gallant Conseil felt the same symptoms, suffered the same sufferings, yet never left my side.

He held my hand, he kept encouraging me, and I even heard him mutter: "Oh, if only I didn't have to breathe, to leave more air for master!"

It brought tears to my eyes to hear him say these words.

Since conditions inside were universally unbearable, how eagerly, how happily, we put on our diving suits to take our turns working!

Picks rang out on that bed of ice.

Arms grew weary, hands were rubbed raw, but who cared about exhaustion, what difference were wounds?

Life-sustaining air reached our lungs!

We could breathe!

We could breathe!

And yet nobody prolonged his underwater work beyond the time allotted him.

His shift over, each man surrendered to a gasping companion the air tank that would revive him.

Captain Nemo set the example and was foremost in submitting to this strict discipline.

When his time was up, he yielded his equipment to another and reentered the foul air on board, always calm, unflinching, and uncomplaining.

That day the usual work was accomplished with even greater energy.

Over the whole surface area, only two meters were left to be removed.

Only two meters separated us from the open sea.

But the ship's air tanks were nearly empty.

The little air that remained had to be saved for the workmen.

Not an atom for the Nautilus!

When I returned on board, I felt half suffocated.

What a night!

I'm unable to depict it.

Such sufferings are indescribable.

The next day I was short-winded.

Headaches and staggering fits of dizziness made me reel like a drunk.

My companions were experiencing the same symptoms.

Some crewmen were at their last gasp.

That day, the sixth of our imprisonment, Captain Nemo concluded that picks and mattocks were too slow to deal with the ice layer still separating us from open water--and he decided to crush this layer.

The man had kept his energy and composure.

He had subdued physical pain with moral strength.

He could still think, plan, and act.

At his orders the craft was eased off, in other words, it was raised from its icy bed by a change in its specific gravity.

When it was afloat, the crew towed it, leading it right above the immense trench outlined to match the ship's waterline.

Next the ballast tanks filled with water, the boat sank, and was fitted into its socket.

Just then the whole crew returned on board, and the double outside door was closed.

By this point the Nautilus was resting on a bed of ice only one meter thick and drilled by bores in a thousand places.

The stopcocks of the ballast tanks were then opened wide, and 100 cubic meters of water rushed in, increasing the Nautilus's weight by 100,000 kilograms.

We waited, we listened, we forgot our sufferings, we hoped once more.

We had staked our salvation on this one last gamble.

Despite the buzzing in my head, I soon could hear vibrations under the Nautilus's hull.

We tilted.

The ice cracked with an odd ripping sound, like paper tearing, and the Nautilus began settling downward.

"We're going through!"

Conseil muttered in my ear.

I couldn't answer him.

I clutched his hand.

I squeezed it in an involuntary convulsion.

All at once, carried away by its frightful excess load, the Nautilus sank into the waters like a cannonball, in other words, dropping as if in a vacuum!

Our full electric power was then put on the pumps, which instantly began to expel water from the ballast tanks.

After a few minutes we had checked our fall.

The pressure gauge soon indicated an ascending movement.

Brought to full speed, the propeller made the sheet-iron hull tremble down to its rivets, and we sped northward.

But how long would it take to navigate under the Ice Bank to the open sea?

Another day?

I would be dead first!

Half lying on a couch in the library, I was suffocating.

My face was purple, my lips blue, my faculties in abeyance.

I could no longer see or hear.

I had lost all sense of time.

My muscles had no power to contract.

I'm unable to estimate the hours that passed in this way.

But I was aware that my death throes had begun.

I realized that I was about to die .

.

.

Suddenly I regained consciousness.

A few whiffs of air had entered my lungs.

Had we risen to the surface of the waves?

Had we cleared the Ice Bank?

No!

Ned and Conseil, my two gallant friends, were sacrificing themselves to save me.

A few atoms of air were still left in the depths of one Rouquayrol device.

Instead of breathing it themselves, they had saved it for me, and while they were suffocating, they poured life into me drop by drop!

I tried to push the device away.

They held my hands, and for a few moments I could breathe luxuriously.

My eyes flew toward the clock.

It was eleven in the morning.

It had to be March 28.

The Nautilus was traveling at the frightful speed of forty miles per hour.

It was writhing in the waters.

Where was Captain Nemo?

Had he perished?

Had his companions died with him?

Just then the pressure gauge indicated we were no more than twenty feet from the surface.

Separating us from the open air was a mere tract of ice.

Could we break through it?

Perhaps!

In any event the Nautilus was going to try.

In fact, I could feel it assuming an oblique position, lowering its stern and raising its spur.

The admission of additional water was enough to shift its balance.

Then, driven by its powerful propeller, it attacked this ice field from below like a fearsome battering ram.

It split the barrier little by little, backing up, then putting on full speed against the punctured tract of ice; and finally, carried away by its supreme momentum, it lunged through and onto this frozen surface, crushing the ice beneath its weight.

The hatches were opened--or torn off, if you prefer--and waves of clean air were admitted into every part of the Nautilus.

From Cape Horn to the Amazon HOW I GOT ONTO the platform I'm unable to say.

Perhaps the Canadian transferred me there.

But I could breathe, I could inhale the life-giving sea air.

Next to me my two companions were getting tipsy on the fresh oxygen particles.

Poor souls who have suffered from long starvation mustn't pounce heedlessly on the first food given them.

We, on the other hand, didn't have to practice such moderation: we could suck the atoms from the air by the lungful, and it was the breeze, the breeze itself, that poured into us this luxurious intoxication!

"Ahhh!"

Conseil was putting in.

"What fine oxygen!

Let master have no fears about breathing.

There's enough for everyone."

As for Ned Land, he didn't say a word, but his wide-open jaws would have scared off a shark.

And what powerful inhalations!

The Canadian "drew"

like a furnace going full blast.

Our strength returned promptly, and when I looked around, I saw that we were alone on the platform.

No crewmen.

Not even Captain Nemo.

Those strange seamen on the Nautilus were content with the oxygen circulating inside.

Not one of them had come up to enjoy the open air.

The first words I pronounced were words of appreciation and gratitude to my two companions.

Ned and Conseil had kept me alive during the final hours of our long death throes.

But no expression of thanks could repay them fully for such devotion.

"Good lord, professor,"

Ned Land answered me, "don't mention it!

What did we do that's so praiseworthy?

Not a thing.

It was a question of simple arithmetic.

Your life is worth more than ours.

So we had to save it."

"No, Ned,"

I replied, "it isn't worth more.

Nobody could be better than a kind and generous man like yourself!"

"All right, all right!"

the Canadian repeated in embarrassment.

"And you, my gallant Conseil, you suffered a great deal."

"Not too much, to be candid with master.

I was lacking a few throatfuls of air, but I would have gotten by.

Besides, when I saw master fainting, it left me without the slightest desire to breathe.

It took my breath away, in a manner of .

.

."

Confounded by this lapse into banality, Conseil left his sentence hanging.

"My friends,"

I replied, very moved, "we're bound to each other forever, and I'm deeply indebted to you--"

"Which I'll take advantage of,"

the Canadian shot back.

"Eh?"

Conseil put in.

"Yes,"

Ned Land went on.

"You can repay your debt by coming with me when I leave this infernal Nautilus."

"By the way,"

Conseil said, "are we going in a favorable direction?"

"Yes,"

I replied, "because we're going in the direction of the sun, and here the sun is due north."

"Sure,"

Ned Land went on, "but it remains to be seen whether we'll make for the Atlantic or the Pacific, in other words, whether we'll end up in well-traveled or deserted seas."

I had no reply to this, and I feared that Captain Nemo wouldn't take us homeward but rather into that huge ocean washing the shores of both Asia and America.

In this way he would complete his underwater tour of the world, going back to those seas where the Nautilus enjoyed the greatest freedom.

But if we returned to the Pacific, far from every populated shore, what would happen to Ned Land's plans?

We would soon settle this important point.

The Nautilus traveled swiftly.

Soon we had cleared the Antarctic Circle plus the promontory of Cape Horn.

We were abreast of the tip of South America by March 31 at seven o'clock in the evening.

By then all our past sufferings were forgotten.

The memory of that imprisonment under the ice faded from our minds.

We had thoughts only of the future.

Captain Nemo no longer appeared, neither in the lounge nor on the platform.

The positions reported each day on the world map were put there by the chief officer, and they enabled me to determine the Nautilus's exact heading.

Now then, that evening it became obvious, much to my satisfaction, that we were returning north by the Atlantic route.

I shared the results of my observations with the Canadian and Conseil.

"That's good news,"

the Canadian replied, "but where's the Nautilus going?"

"I'm unable to say, Ned."

"After the South Pole, does our captain want to tackle the North Pole, then go back to the Pacific by the notorious Northwest Passage?"

"I wouldn't double dare him,"

Conseil replied.

"Oh well,"

the Canadian said, "we'll give him the slip long before then."

"In any event,"

Conseil added, "he's a superman, that Captain Nemo, and we'll never regret having known him."

"Especially once we've left him,"

Ned Land shot back.

The next day, April 1, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of the waves a few minutes before noon, we raised land to the west.

It was Tierra del Fuego, the Land of Fire, a name given it by early navigators after they saw numerous curls of smoke rising from the natives' huts.

This Land of Fire forms a huge cluster of islands over thirty leagues long and eighty leagues wide, extending between latitude 53 degrees and 56 degrees south, and between longitude 67 degrees 50' and 77 degrees 15' west.

Its coastline looked flat, but high mountains rose in the distance.

I even thought I glimpsed Mt.

Sarmiento, whose elevation is 2,070 meters above sea level: a pyramid-shaped block of shale with a very sharp summit, which, depending on whether it's clear or veiled in vapor, "predicts fair weather or foul,"

as Ned Land told me.

"A first-class barometer, my friend."

"Yes, sir, a natural barometer that didn't let me down when I navigated the narrows of the Strait of Magellan."

Just then its peak appeared before us, standing out distinctly against the background of the skies.

This forecast fair weather.

And so it proved.

Going back under the waters, the Nautilus drew near the coast, cruising along it for only a few miles.

Through the lounge windows I could see long creepers and gigantic fucus plants, bulb-bearing seaweed of which the open sea at the pole had revealed a few specimens; with their smooth, viscous filaments, they measured as much as 300 meters long; genuine cables more than an inch thick and very tough, they're often used as mooring lines for ships.

Another weed, known by the name velp and boasting four-foot leaves, was crammed into the coral concretions and carpeted the ocean floor.

It served as both nest and nourishment for myriads of crustaceans and mollusks, for crabs and cuttlefish.

Here seals and otters could indulge in a sumptuous meal, mixing meat from fish with vegetables from the sea, like the English with their Irish stews.

The Nautilus passed over these lush, luxuriant depths with tremendous speed.

Near evening it approached the Falkland Islands, whose rugged summits I recognized the next day.

The sea was of moderate depth.

So not without good reason, I assumed that these two islands, plus the many islets surrounding them, used to be part of the Magellan coastline.

The Falkland Islands were probably discovered by the famous navigator John Davis, who gave them the name Davis Southern Islands.

Later Sir Richard Hawkins called them the Maidenland, after the Blessed Virgin.

Subsequently, at the beginning of the 18th century, they were named the Malouines by fishermen from Saint-Malo in Brittany, then finally dubbed the Falklands by the English, to whom they belong today.

In these waterways our nets brought up fine samples of algae, in particular certain fucus plants whose roots were laden with the world's best mussels.

Geese and duck alighted by the dozens on the platform and soon took their places in the ship's pantry.

As for fish, I specifically observed some bony fish belonging to the goby genus, especially some gudgeon two decimeters long, sprinkled with whitish and yellow spots.

I likewise marveled at the numerous medusas, including the most beautiful of their breed, the compass jellyfish, unique to the Falkland seas.

Some of these jellyfish were shaped like very smooth, semispheric parasols with russet stripes and fringes of twelve neat festoons.

Others looked like upside-down baskets from which wide leaves and long red twigs were gracefully trailing.

They swam with quiverings of their four leaflike arms, letting the opulent tresses of their tentacles dangle in the drift.

I wanted to preserve a few specimens of these delicate zoophytes, but they were merely clouds, shadows, illusions, melting and evaporating outside their native element.

When the last tips of the Falkland Islands had disappeared below the horizon, the Nautilus submerged to a depth between twenty and twenty-five meters and went along the South American coast.

Captain Nemo didn't put in an appearance.

We didn't leave these Patagonian waterways until April 3, sometimes cruising under the ocean, sometimes on its surface.

The Nautilus passed the wide estuary formed by the mouth of the Rio de la Plata, and on April 4 we lay abreast of Uruguay, albeit fifty miles out.

Keeping to its northerly heading, it followed the long windings of South America.

By then we had fared 16,000 leagues since coming on board in the seas of Japan.

Near eleven o'clock in the morning, we cut the Tropic of Capricorn on the 37th meridian, passing well out from Cape Frio.

Much to Ned Land's displeasure, Captain Nemo had no liking for the neighborhood of Brazil's populous shores, because he shot by with dizzying speed.

Not even the swiftest fish or birds could keep up with us, and the natural curiosities in these seas completely eluded our observation.

This speed was maintained for several days, and on the evening of April 9, we raised South America's easternmost tip, Cape So Roque.

But then the Nautilus veered away again and went looking for the lowest depths of an underwater valley gouged between this cape and Sierra Leone on the coast of Africa.

Abreast of the West Indies, this valley forks into two arms, and to the north it ends in an enormous depression 9,000 meters deep.

From this locality to the Lesser Antilles, the ocean's geologic profile features a steeply cut cliff six kilometers high, and abreast of the Cape Verde Islands, there's another wall just as imposing; together these two barricades confine the whole submerged continent of Atlantis.

The floor of this immense valley is made picturesque by mountains that furnish these underwater depths with scenic views.

This description is based mostly on certain hand-drawn charts kept in the Nautilus's library, charts obviously rendered by Captain Nemo himself from his own personal observations.

For two days we visited these deep and deserted waters by means of our slanting fins.

The Nautilus would do long, diagonal dives that took us to every level.

But on April 11 it rose suddenly, and the shore reappeared at the mouth of the Amazon River, a huge estuary whose outflow is so considerable, it desalts the sea over an area of several leagues.

We cut the Equator.

Twenty miles to the west lay Guiana, French territory where we could easily have taken refuge.

But the wind was blowing a strong gust, and the furious billows would not allow us to face them in a mere skiff.

No doubt Ned Land understood this because he said nothing to me.

For my part, I made no allusion to his escape plans because I didn't want to push him into an attempt that was certain to misfire.

I was readily compensated for this delay by fascinating research.

During those two days of April 11-12, the Nautilus didn't leave the surface of the sea, and its trawl brought up a simply miraculous catch of zoophytes, fish, and reptiles.

Some zoophytes were dredged up by the chain of our trawl.

Most were lovely sea anemone belonging to the family Actinidia, including among other species, the Phyctalis protexta, native to this part of the ocean: a small cylindrical trunk adorned with vertical lines, mottled with red spots, and crowned by a wondrous blossoming of tentacles.

As for mollusks, they consisted of exhibits I had already observed: turret snails, olive shells of the "tent olive"

species with neatly intersecting lines and russet spots standing out sharply against a flesh-colored background, fanciful spider conchs that looked like petrified scorpions, transparent glass snails, argonauts, some highly edible cuttlefish, and certain species of squid that the naturalists of antiquity classified with the flying fish, which are used chiefly as bait for catching cod.

As for the fish in these waterways, I noted various species that I hadn't yet had the opportunity to study.

Among cartilaginous fish: some brook lamprey, a type of eel fifteen inches long, head greenish, fins violet, back bluish gray, belly a silvery brown strewn with bright spots, iris of the eye encircled in gold, unusual animals that the Amazon's current must have swept out to sea because their natural habitat is fresh water; sting rays, the snout pointed, the tail long, slender, and armed with an extensive jagged sting; small one-meter sharks with gray and whitish hides, their teeth arranged in several backward-curving rows, fish commonly known by the name carpet shark; batfish, a sort of reddish isosceles triangle half a meter long, whose pectoral fins are attached by fleshy extensions that make these fish look like bats, although an appendage made of horn, located near the nostrils, earns them the nickname of sea unicorns; lastly, a couple species of triggerfish, the cucuyo whose stippled flanks glitter with a sparkling gold color, and the bright purple leatherjacket whose hues glisten like a pigeon's throat.

I'll finish up this catalog, a little dry but quite accurate, with the series of bony fish I observed: eels belonging to the genus Apteronotus whose snow-white snout is very blunt, the body painted a handsome black and armed with a very long, slender, fleshy whip; long sardines from the genus Odontognathus, like three-decimeter pike, shining with a bright silver glow; Guaranian mackerel furnished with two anal fins; black-tinted rudderfish that you catch by using torches, fish measuring two meters and boasting white, firm, plump meat that, when fresh, tastes like eel, when dried, like smoked salmon; semired wrasse sporting scales only at the bases of their dorsal and anal fins; grunts on which gold and silver mingle their luster with that of ruby and topaz; yellow-tailed gilthead whose flesh is extremely dainty and whose phosphorescent properties give them away in the midst of the waters; porgies tinted orange, with slender tongues; croakers with gold caudal fins; black surgeonfish; four-eyed fish from Surinam, etc.

This "et cetera"

won't keep me from mentioning one more fish that Conseil, with good reason, will long remember.

One of our nets had hauled up a type of very flat ray that weighed some twenty kilograms; with its tail cut off, it would have formed a perfect disk.

It was white underneath and reddish on top, with big round spots of deep blue encircled in black, its hide quite smooth and ending in a double-lobed fin.

Laid out on the platform, it kept struggling with convulsive movements, trying to turn over, making such efforts that its final lunge was about to flip it into the sea.

But Conseil, being very possessive of his fish, rushed at it, and before I could stop him, he seized it with both hands.

Instantly there he was, thrown on his back, legs in the air, his body half paralyzed, and yelling: "Oh, sir, sir!

Will you help me!"

For once in his life, the poor lad didn't address me "in the third person."

The Canadian and I sat him up; we massaged his contracted arms, and when he regained his five senses, that eternal classifier mumbled in a broken voice: "Class of cartilaginous fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills, suborder Selacia, family Rajiiforma, genus electric ray."

"Yes, my friend,"

I answered, "it was an electric ray that put you in this deplorable state."

"Oh, master can trust me on this,"

Conseil shot back.

"I'll be revenged on that animal!"

"How?"

"I'll eat it."

Which he did that same evening, but strictly as retaliation.

Because, frankly, it tasted like leather.

Poor Conseil had assaulted an electric ray of the most dangerous species, the cumana.

Living in a conducting medium such as water, this bizarre animal can electrocute other fish from several meters away, so great is the power of its electric organ, an organ whose two chief surfaces measure at least twenty-seven square feet.

During the course of the next day, April 12, the Nautilus drew near the coast of Dutch Guiana, by the mouth of the Maroni River.

There several groups of sea cows were living in family units.

These were manatees, which belong to the order Sirenia, like the dugong and Steller's sea cow.

Harmless and unaggressive, these fine animals were six to seven meters long and must have weighed at least 4,000 kilograms each.

I told Ned Land and Conseil that farseeing nature had given these mammals a major role to play.

In essence, manatees, like seals, are designed to graze the underwater prairies, destroying the clusters of weeds that obstruct the mouths of tropical rivers.

"And do you know,"

I added, "what happened since man has almost completely wiped out these beneficial races?

Rotting weeds have poisoned the air, and this poisoned air causes the yellow fever that devastates these wonderful countries.

This toxic vegetation has increased beneath the seas of the Torrid Zone, so the disease spreads unchecked from the mouth of the Rio de la Plata to Florida!"

And if Professor Toussenel is correct, this plague is nothing compared to the scourge that will strike our descendants once the seas are depopulated of whales and seals.

By then, crowded with jellyfish, squid, and other devilfish, the oceans will have become huge centers of infection, because their waves will no longer possess "these huge stomachs that God has entrusted with scouring the surface of the sea."

Meanwhile, without scorning these theories, the Nautilus's crew captured half a dozen manatees.

In essence, it was an issue of stocking the larder with excellent red meat, even better than beef or veal.

Their hunting was not a fascinating sport.

The manatees let themselves be struck down without offering any resistance.

Several thousand kilos of meat were hauled below, to be dried and stored.

The same day an odd fishing practice further increased the Nautilus's stores, so full of game were these seas.

Our trawl brought up in its meshes a number of fish whose heads were topped by little oval slabs with fleshy edges.

These were suckerfish from the third family of the subbrachian Malacopterygia.

These flat disks on their heads consist of crosswise plates of movable cartilage, between which the animals can create a vacuum, enabling them to stick to objects like suction cups.

The remoras I had observed in the Mediterranean were related to this species.

But the creature at issue here was an Echeneis osteochara, unique to this sea.

Right after catching them, our seamen dropped them in buckets of water.

Its fishing finished, the Nautilus drew nearer to the coast.

In this locality a number of sea turtles were sleeping on the surface of the waves.

It would have been difficult to capture these valuable reptiles, because they wake up at the slightest sound, and their solid carapaces are harpoon-proof.

But our suckerfish would effect their capture with extraordinary certainty and precision.

In truth, this animal is a living fishhook, promising wealth and happiness to the greenest fisherman in the business.

The Nautilus's men attached to each fish's tail a ring that was big enough not to hamper its movements, and to this ring a long rope whose other end was moored on board.

Thrown into the sea, the suckerfish immediately began to play their roles, going and fastening themselves onto the breastplates of the turtles.

Their tenacity was so great, they would rip apart rather than let go.

They were hauled in, still sticking to the turtles that came aboard with them.

In this way we caught several loggerheads, reptiles a meter wide and weighing 200 kilos.

They're extremely valuable because of their carapaces, which are covered with big slabs of horn, thin, brown, transparent, with white and yellow markings.

Besides, they were excellent from an edible viewpoint, with an exquisite flavor comparable to the green turtle.

This fishing ended our stay in the waterways of the Amazon, and that evening the Nautilus took to the high seas once more.

The Devilfish FOR SOME DAYS the Nautilus kept veering away from the American coast.

It obviously didn't want to frequent the waves of the Gulf of Mexico or the Caribbean Sea.

Yet there was no shortage of water under its keel, since the average depth of these seas is 1,800 meters; but these waterways, strewn with islands and plowed by steamers, probably didn't agree with Captain Nemo.

On April 16 we raised Martinique and Guadalupe from a distance of about thirty miles.

For one instant I could see their lofty peaks.

The Canadian was quite disheartened, having counted on putting his plans into execution in the gulf, either by reaching shore or by pulling alongside one of the many boats plying a coastal trade from one island to another.

An escape attempt would have been quite feasible, assuming Ned Land managed to seize the skiff without the captain's knowledge.

But in midocean it was unthinkable.

The Canadian, Conseil, and I had a pretty long conversation on this subject.

For six months we had been prisoners aboard the Nautilus.

We had fared 17,000 leagues, and as Ned Land put it, there was no end in sight.

So he made me a proposition I hadn't anticipated.

We were to ask Captain Nemo this question straight out: did the captain mean to keep us on board his vessel permanently?

This measure was distasteful to me.

To my mind it would lead nowhere.

We could hope for nothing from the Nautilus's commander but could depend only on ourselves.

Besides, for some time now the man had been gloomier, more withdrawn, less sociable.

He seemed to be avoiding me.

I encountered him only at rare intervals.

He used to take pleasure in explaining the underwater wonders to me; now he left me to my research and no longer entered the lounge.

What changes had come over him?

From what cause?

I had no reason to blame myself.

Was our presence on board perhaps a burden to him?

Even so, I cherished no hopes that the man would set us free.

So I begged Ned to let me think about it before taking action.

If this measure proved fruitless, it could arouse the captain's suspicions, make our circumstances even more arduous, and jeopardize the Canadian's plans.

I might add that I could hardly use our state of health as an argument.

Except for that grueling ordeal under the Ice Bank at the South Pole, we had never felt better, neither Ned, Conseil, nor I.

The nutritious food, life-giving air, regular routine, and uniform temperature kept illness at bay; and for a man who didn't miss his past existence on land, for a Captain Nemo who was at home here, who went where he wished, who took paths mysterious to others if not himself in attaining his ends, I could understand such a life.

But we ourselves hadn't severed all ties with humanity.

For my part, I didn't want my new and unusual research to be buried with my bones.

I had now earned the right to pen the definitive book on the sea, and sooner or later I wanted that book to see the light of day.

There once more, through the panels opening into these Caribbean waters ten meters below the surface of the waves, I found so many fascinating exhibits to describe in my daily notes!

Among other zoophytes there were Portuguese men-of-war known by the name Physalia pelagica, like big, oblong bladders with a pearly sheen, spreading their membranes to the wind, letting their blue tentacles drift like silken threads; to the eye delightful jellyfish, to the touch actual nettles that ooze a corrosive liquid.

Among the articulates there were annelid worms one and a half meters long, furnished with a pink proboscis, equipped with 1,700 organs of locomotion, snaking through the waters, and as they went, throwing off every gleam in the solar spectrum.

From the fish branch there were manta rays, enormous cartilaginous fish ten feet long and weighing 600 pounds, their pectoral fin triangular, their midback slightly arched, their eyes attached to the edges of the face at the front of the head; they floated like wreckage from a ship, sometimes fastening onto our windows like opaque shutters.

There were American triggerfish for which nature has ground only black and white pigments, feather-shaped gobies that were long and plump with yellow fins and jutting jaws, sixteen-decimeter mackerel with short, sharp teeth, covered with small scales, and related to the albacore species.

Next came swarms of red mullet corseted in gold stripes from head to tail, their shining fins all aquiver, genuine masterpieces of jewelry, formerly sacred to the goddess Diana, much in demand by rich Romans, and about which the old saying goes: "He who catches them doesn't eat them!"

Finally, adorned with emerald ribbons and dressed in velvet and silk, golden angelfish passed before our eyes like courtiers in the paintings of Veronese; spurred gilthead stole by with their swift thoracic fins; thread herring fifteen inches long were wrapped in their phosphorescent glimmers; gray mullet thrashed the sea with their big fleshy tails; red salmon seemed to mow the waves with their slicing pectorals; and silver moonfish, worthy of their name, rose on the horizon of the waters like the whitish reflections of many moons.

How many other marvelous new specimens I still could have observed if, little by little, the Nautilus hadn't settled to the lower strata!

Its slanting fins drew it to depths of 2,000 and 3,500 meters.

There animal life was represented by nothing more than sea lilies, starfish, delightful crinoids with bell-shaped heads like little chalices on straight stems, top-shell snails, blood-red tooth shells, and fissurella snails, a large species of coastal mollusk.

By April 20 we had risen to an average level of 1,500 meters.

The nearest land was the island group of the Bahamas, scattered like a batch of cobblestones over the surface of the water.

There high underwater cliffs reared up, straight walls made of craggy chunks arranged like big stone foundations, among which there gaped black caves so deep our electric rays couldn't light them to the far ends.

These rocks were hung with huge weeds, immense sea tangle, gigantic fucus-- a genuine trellis of water plants fit for a world of giants.

In discussing these colossal plants, Conseil, Ned, and I were naturally led into mentioning the sea's gigantic animals.

The former were obviously meant to feed the latter.

However, through the windows of our almost motionless Nautilus, I could see nothing among these long filaments other than the chief articulates of the division Brachyura: long-legged spider crabs, violet crabs, and sponge crabs unique to the waters of the Caribbean.

It was about eleven o'clock when Ned Land drew my attention to a fearsome commotion out in this huge seaweed.

"Well,"

I said, "these are real devilfish caverns, and I wouldn't be surprised to see some of those monsters hereabouts."

"What!"

Conseil put in.

"Squid, ordinary squid from the class Cephalopoda?"

"No,"

I said, "devilfish of large dimensions.

But friend Land is no doubt mistaken, because I don't see a thing."

"That's regrettable,"

Conseil answered.

"I'd like to come face to face with one of those devilfish I've heard so much about, which can drag ships down into the depths.

Those beasts go by the name of krake--"

"Fake is more like it,"

the Canadian replied sarcastically.

"Krakens!"

Conseil shot back, finishing his word without wincing at his companion's witticism.

"Nobody will ever make me believe,"

Ned Land said, "that such animals exist."

"Why not?"

Conseil replied.

"We sincerely believed in master's narwhale."

"We were wrong, Conseil."

"No doubt, but there are others with no doubts who believe to this day!"

"Probably, Conseil.

But as for me, I'm bound and determined not to accept the existence of any such monster till I've dissected it with my own two hands."

"Yet,"

Conseil asked me, "doesn't master believe in gigantic devilfish?"

"Yikes!

Who in Hades ever believed in them?"

the Canadian exclaimed.

"Many people, Ned my friend,"

I said.

"No fishermen.

Scientists maybe!"

"Pardon me, Ned.

Fishermen and scientists!"

"Why, I to whom you speak,"

Conseil said with the world's straightest face, "I recall perfectly seeing a large boat dragged under the waves by the arms of a cephalopod."

"You saw that?"

the Canadian asked.

"Yes, Ned."

"With your own two eyes?"

"With my own two eyes."

"Where, may I ask?"

"In Saint-Malo,"

Conseil returned unflappably.

"In the harbor?"

Ned Land said sarcastically.

"No, in a church,"

Conseil replied.

"In a church!"

the Canadian exclaimed.

"Yes, Ned my friend.

It had a picture that portrayed the devilfish in question."

"Oh good!"

Ned Land exclaimed with a burst of laughter.

"Mr.

Conseil put one over on me!"

"Actually he's right,"

I said.

"I've heard about that picture.

But the subject it portrays is taken from a legend, and you know how to rate legends in matters of natural history!

Besides, when it's an issue of monsters, the human imagination always tends to run wild.

People not only claimed these devilfish could drag ships under, but a certain Olaus Magnus tells of a cephalopod a mile long that looked more like an island than an animal.

There's also the story of how the Bishop of Trondheim set up an altar one day on an immense rock.

After he finished saying mass, this rock started moving and went back into the sea.

The rock was a devilfish."

"And that's everything we know?"

the Canadian asked.

"No,"

I replied, "another bishop, Pontoppidan of Bergen, also tells of a devilfish so large a whole cavalry regiment could maneuver on it."

"They sure did go on, those oldtime bishops!"

Ned Land said.

"Finally, the naturalists of antiquity mention some monsters with mouths as big as a gulf, which were too huge to get through the Strait of Gibraltar."

"Good work, men!"

the Canadian put in.

"But in all these stories, is there any truth?"

Conseil asked.

"None at all, my friends, at least in those that go beyond the bounds of credibility and fly off into fable or legend.

Yet for the imaginings of these storytellers there had to be, if not a cause, at least an excuse.

It can't be denied that some species of squid and other devilfish are quite large, though still smaller than cetaceans.

Aristotle put the dimensions of one squid at five cubits, or 3.1 meters.

Our fishermen frequently see specimens over 1.8 meters long.

The museums in Trieste and Montpellier have preserved some devilfish carcasses measuring two meters.

Besides, according to the calculations of naturalists, one of these animals only six feet long would have tentacles as long as twenty-seven.

Which is enough to make a fearsome monster."

"Does anybody fish for 'em nowadays?"

the Canadian asked.

"If they don't fish for them, sailors at least sight them.

A friend of mine, Captain Paul Bos of Le Havre, has often sworn to me that he encountered one of these monsters of colossal size in the seas of the East Indies.

But the most astonishing event, which proves that these gigantic animals undeniably exist, took place a few years ago in 1861."

"What event was that?"

Ned Land asked.

"Just this.

In 1861, to the northeast of Tenerife and fairly near the latitude where we are right now, the crew of the gunboat Alecto spotted a monstrous squid swimming in their waters.

Commander Bouguer approached the animal and attacked it with blows from harpoons and blasts from rifles, but without much success because bullets and harpoons crossed its soft flesh as if it were semiliquid jelly.

After several fruitless attempts, the crew managed to slip a noose around the mollusk's body.

This noose slid as far as the caudal fins and came to a halt.

Then they tried to haul the monster on board, but its weight was so considerable that when they tugged on the rope, the animal parted company with its tail; and deprived of this adornment, it disappeared beneath the waters."

"Finally, an actual event,"

Ned Land said.

"An indisputable event, my gallant Ned.

Accordingly, people have proposed naming this devilfish Bouguer's Squid."

"And how long was it?"

the Canadian asked.

"Didn't it measure about six meters?"

said Conseil, who was stationed at the window and examining anew the crevices in the cliff.

"Precisely,"

I replied.

"Wasn't its head,"

Conseil went on, "crowned by eight tentacles that quivered in the water like a nest of snakes?"

"Precisely."

"Weren't its eyes prominently placed and considerably enlarged?"

"Yes, Conseil."

"And wasn't its mouth a real parrot's beak but of fearsome size?"

"Correct, Conseil."

"Well, with all due respect to master,"

Conseil replied serenely, "if this isn't Bouguer's Squid, it's at least one of his close relatives!"

I stared at Conseil.

Ned Land rushed to the window.

"What an awful animal!"

he exclaimed.

I stared in my turn and couldn't keep back a movement of revulsion.

Before my eyes there quivered a horrible monster worthy of a place among the most farfetched teratological legends.

It was a squid of colossal dimensions, fully eight meters long.

It was traveling backward with tremendous speed in the same direction as the Nautilus.

It gazed with enormous, staring eyes that were tinted sea green.

Its eight arms (or more accurately, feet) were rooted in its head, which has earned these animals the name cephalopod; its arms stretched a distance twice the length of its body and were writhing like the serpentine hair of the Furies.

You could plainly see its 250 suckers, arranged over the inner sides of its tentacles and shaped like semispheric capsules.

Sometimes these suckers fastened onto the lounge window by creating vacuums against it.

The monster's mouth--a beak made of horn and shaped like that of a parrot--opened and closed vertically.

Its tongue, also of horn substance and armed with several rows of sharp teeth, would flicker out from between these genuine shears.

What a freak of nature!

A bird's beak on a mollusk!

Its body was spindle-shaped and swollen in the middle, a fleshy mass that must have weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilograms.

Its unstable color would change with tremendous speed as the animal grew irritated, passing successively from bluish gray to reddish brown.

What was irritating this mollusk?

No doubt the presence of the Nautilus, even more fearsome than itself, and which it couldn't grip with its mandibles or the suckers on its arms.

And yet what monsters these devilfish are, what vitality our Creator has given them, what vigor in their movements, thanks to their owning a triple heart!

Sheer chance had placed us in the presence of this squid, and I didn't want to lose this opportunity to meticulously study such a cephalopod specimen.

I overcame the horror that its appearance inspired in me, picked up a pencil, and began to sketch it.

"Perhaps this is the same as the Alecto's,"

Conseil said.

"Can't be,"

the Canadian replied, "because this one's complete while the other one lost its tail!"

"That doesn't necessarily follow,"

I said.

"The arms and tails of these animals grow back through regeneration, and in seven years the tail on Bouguer's Squid has surely had time to sprout again."

"Anyhow,"

Ned shot back, "if it isn't this fellow, maybe it's one of those!"

Indeed, other devilfish had appeared at the starboard window.

I counted seven of them.

They provided the Nautilus with an escort, and I could hear their beaks gnashing on the sheet-iron hull.

We couldn't have asked for a more devoted following.

I continued sketching.

These monsters kept pace in our waters with such precision, they seemed to be standing still, and I could have traced their outlines in miniature on the window.

But we were moving at a moderate speed.

All at once the Nautilus stopped.

A jolt made it tremble through its entire framework.

"Did we strike bottom?"

I asked.

"In any event we're already clear,"

the Canadian replied, "because we're afloat."

The Nautilus was certainly afloat, but it was no longer in motion.

The blades of its propeller weren't churning the waves.

A minute passed.

Followed by his chief officer, Captain Nemo entered the lounge.

I hadn't seen him for a good while.

He looked gloomy to me.

Without speaking to us, without even seeing us perhaps, he went to the panel, stared at the devilfish, and said a few words to his chief officer.

The latter went out.

Soon the panels closed.

The ceiling lit up.

I went over to the captain.

"An unusual assortment of devilfish,"

I told him, as carefree as a collector in front of an aquarium.

"Correct, Mr.

Naturalist,"

he answered me, "and we're going to fight them at close quarters."

I gaped at the captain.

I thought my hearing had gone bad.

"At close quarters?"

I repeated.

"Yes, sir.

Our propeller is jammed.

I think the horn-covered mandibles of one of these squid are entangled in the blades.

That's why we aren't moving."

"And what are you going to do?"

"Rise to the surface and slaughter the vermin."

"A difficult undertaking."

"Correct.

Our electric bullets are ineffective against such soft flesh, where they don't meet enough resistance to go off.

But we'll attack the beasts with axes."

"And harpoons, sir,"

the Canadian said, "if you don't turn down my help."

"I accept it, Mr.

Land."

"We'll go with you,"

I said.

And we followed Captain Nemo, heading to the central companionway.

There some ten men were standing by for the assault, armed with boarding axes.

Conseil and I picked up two more axes.

Ned Land seized a harpoon.

By then the Nautilus had returned to the surface of the waves.

Stationed on the top steps, one of the seamen undid the bolts of the hatch.

But he had scarcely unscrewed the nuts when the hatch flew up with tremendous violence, obviously pulled open by the suckers on a devilfish's arm.

Instantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the opening, and twenty others were quivering above.

With a sweep of the ax, Captain Nemo chopped off this fearsome tentacle, which slid writhing down the steps.

Just as we were crowding each other to reach the platform, two more arms lashed the air, swooped on the seaman stationed in front of Captain Nemo, and carried the fellow away with irresistible violence.

Captain Nemo gave a shout and leaped outside.

We rushed after him.

What a scene!

Seized by the tentacle and glued to its suckers, the unfortunate man was swinging in the air at the mercy of this enormous appendage.

He gasped, he choked, he yelled: "Help!

Help!"

These words, pronounced in French, left me deeply stunned!

So I had a fellow countryman on board, perhaps several!

I'll hear his harrowing plea the rest of my life!

The poor fellow was done for.

Who could tear him from such a powerful grip?

Even so, Captain Nemo rushed at the devilfish and with a sweep of the ax hewed one more of its arms.

His chief officer struggled furiously with other monsters crawling up the Nautilus's sides.

The crew battled with flailing axes.

The Canadian, Conseil, and I sank our weapons into these fleshy masses.

An intense, musky odor filled the air.

It was horrible.

For an instant I thought the poor man entwined by the devilfish might be torn loose from its powerful suction.

Seven arms out of eight had been chopped off.

Brandishing its victim like a feather, one lone tentacle was writhing in the air.

But just as Captain Nemo and his chief officer rushed at it, the animal shot off a spout of blackish liquid, secreted by a pouch located in its abdomen.

It blinded us.

When this cloud had dispersed, the squid was gone, and so was my poor fellow countryman!

What rage then drove us against these monsters!

We lost all self-control.

Ten or twelve devilfish had overrun the Nautilus's platform and sides.

We piled helter-skelter into the thick of these sawed-off snakes, which darted over the platform amid waves of blood and sepia ink.

It seemed as if these viscous tentacles grew back like the many heads of Hydra.

At every thrust Ned Land's harpoon would plunge into a squid's sea-green eye and burst it.

But my daring companion was suddenly toppled by the tentacles of a monster he could not avoid.

Oh, my heart nearly exploded with excitement and horror!

The squid's fearsome beak was wide open over Ned Land.

The poor man was about to be cut in half.

I ran to his rescue.

But Captain Nemo got there first.

His ax disappeared between the two enormous mandibles, and the Canadian, miraculously saved, stood and plunged his harpoon all the way into the devilfish's triple heart.

"Tit for tat,"

Captain Nemo told the Canadian.

"I owed it to myself!"

Ned bowed without answering him.

This struggle had lasted a quarter of an hour.

Defeated, mutilated, battered to death, the monsters finally yielded to us and disappeared beneath the waves.

Red with blood, motionless by the beacon, Captain Nemo stared at the sea that had swallowed one of his companions, and large tears streamed from his eyes.

The Gulf Stream THIS DREADFUL SCENE on April 20 none of us will ever be able to forget.

I wrote it up in a state of intense excitement.

Later I reviewed my narrative.

I read it to Conseil and the Canadian.

They found it accurate in detail but deficient in impact.

To convey such sights, it would take the pen of our most famous poet, Victor Hugo, As I said, Captain Nemo wept while staring at the waves.

His grief was immense.

This was the second companion he had lost since we had come aboard.

And what a way to die!

Smashed, strangled, crushed by the fearsome arms of a devilfish, ground between its iron mandibles, this friend would never rest with his companions in the placid waters of their coral cemetery!

As for me, what had harrowed my heart in the thick of this struggle was the despairing yell given by this unfortunate man.

Forgetting his regulation language, this poor Frenchman had reverted to speaking his own mother tongue to fling out one supreme plea!

Among the Nautilus's crew, allied body and soul with Captain Nemo and likewise fleeing from human contact, I had found a fellow countryman!

Was he the only representative of France in this mysterious alliance, obviously made up of individuals from different nationalities?

This was just one more of those insoluble problems that kept welling up in my mind!

Captain Nemo reentered his stateroom, and I saw no more of him for a good while.

But how sad, despairing, and irresolute he must have felt, to judge from this ship whose soul he was, which reflected his every mood!

The Nautilus no longer kept to a fixed heading.

It drifted back and forth, riding with the waves like a corpse.

Its propeller had been disentangled but was barely put to use.

It was navigating at random.

It couldn't tear itself away from the setting of this last struggle, from this sea that had devoured one of its own!

Ten days went by in this way.

It was only on May 1 that the Nautilus openly resumed its northbound course, after raising the Bahamas at the mouth of Old Bahama Channel.

We then went with the current of the sea's greatest river, which has its own banks, fish, and temperature.

I mean the Gulf Stream.

It is indeed a river that runs independently through the middle of the Atlantic, its waters never mixing with the ocean's waters.

It's a salty river, saltier than the sea surrounding it.

Its average depth is 3,000 feet, its average width sixty miles.

In certain localities its current moves at a speed of four kilometers per hour.

The unchanging volume of its waters is greater than that of all the world's rivers combined.

As discovered by Commander Maury, the true source of the Gulf Stream, its starting point, if you prefer, is located in the Bay of Biscay.

There its waters, still weak in temperature and color, begin to form.

It goes down south, skirts equatorial Africa, warms its waves in the rays of the Torrid Zone, crosses the Atlantic, reaches Cape So Roque on the coast of Brazil, and forks into two branches, one going to the Caribbean Sea for further saturation with heat particles.

Then, entrusted with restoring the balance between hot and cold temperatures and with mixing tropical and northern waters, the Gulf Stream begins to play its stabilizing role.

Attaining a white heat in the Gulf of Mexico, it heads north up the American coast, advances as far as Newfoundland, swerves away under the thrust of a cold current from the Davis Strait, and resumes its ocean course by going along a great circle of the earth on a rhumb line; it then divides into two arms near the 43rd parallel; one, helped by the northeast trade winds, returns to the Bay of Biscay and the Azores; the other washes the shores of Ireland and Norway with lukewarm water, goes beyond Spitzbergen, where its temperature falls to 4 degrees centigrade, and fashions the open sea at the pole.

It was on this oceanic river that the Nautilus was then navigating.

Leaving Old Bahama Channel, which is fourteen leagues wide by 350 meters deep, the Gulf Stream moves at the rate of eight kilometers per hour.

Its speed steadily decreases as it advances northward, and we must pray that this steadiness continues, because, as experts agree, if its speed and direction were to change, the climates of Europe would undergo disturbances whose consequences are incalculable.

Near noon I was on the platform with Conseil.

I shared with him the relevant details on the Gulf Stream.

When my explanation was over, I invited him to dip his hands into its current.

Conseil did so, and he was quite astonished to experience no sensation of either hot or cold.

"That comes,"

I told him, "from the water temperature of the Gulf Stream, which, as it leaves the Gulf of Mexico, is barely different from your blood temperature.

This Gulf Stream is a huge heat generator that enables the coasts of Europe to be decked in eternal greenery.

And if Commander Maury is correct, were one to harness the full warmth of this current, it would supply enough heat to keep molten a river of iron solder as big as the Amazon or the Missouri."

Just then the Gulf Stream's speed was 2.25 meters per second.

So distinct is its current from the surrounding sea, its confined waters stand out against the ocean and operate on a different level from the colder waters.

Murky as well, and very rich in saline material, their pure indigo contrasts with the green waves surrounding them.

Moreover, their line of demarcation is so clear that abreast of the Carolinas, the Nautilus's spur cut the waves of the Gulf Stream while its propeller was still churning those belonging to the ocean.

This current swept along with it a whole host of moving creatures.

Argonauts, so common in the Mediterranean, voyaged here in schools of large numbers.

Among cartilaginous fish, the most remarkable were rays whose ultra slender tails made up nearly a third of the body, which was shaped like a huge diamond twenty-five feet long; then little one-meter sharks, the head large, the snout short and rounded, the teeth sharp and arranged in several rows, the body seemingly covered with scales.

Among bony fish, I noted grizzled wrasse unique to these seas, deep-water gilthead whose iris has a fiery gleam, one-meter croakers whose large mouths bristle with small teeth and which let out thin cries, black rudderfish like those I've already discussed, blue dorados accented with gold and silver, rainbow-hued parrotfish that can rival the loveliest tropical birds in coloring, banded blennies with triangular heads, bluish flounder without scales, toadfish covered with a crosswise yellow band in the shape of a Greek t, swarms of little freckled gobies stippled with brown spots, lungfish with silver heads and yellow tails, various specimens of salmon, mullet with slim figures and a softly glowing radiance that Lacpde dedicated to the memory of his wife, and finally the American cavalla, a handsome fish decorated by every honorary order, bedizened with their every ribbon, frequenting the shores of this great nation where ribbons and orders are held in such low esteem.

I might add that during the night, the Gulf Stream's phosphorescent waters rivaled the electric glow of our beacon, especially in the stormy weather that frequently threatened us.

On May 8, while abreast of North Carolina, we were across from Cape Hatteras once more.

There the Gulf Stream is seventy-five miles wide and 210 meters deep.

The Nautilus continued to wander at random.

Seemingly, all supervision had been jettisoned.

Under these conditions I admit that we could easily have gotten away.

In fact, the populous shores offered ready refuge everywhere.

The sea was plowed continuously by the many steamers providing service between the Gulf of Mexico and New York or Boston, and it was crossed night and day by little schooners engaged in coastal trade over various points on the American shore.

We could hope to be picked up.

So it was a promising opportunity, despite the thirty miles that separated the Nautilus from these Union coasts.

But one distressing circumstance totally thwarted the Canadian's plans.

The weather was thoroughly foul.

We were approaching waterways where storms are commonplace, the very homeland of tornadoes and cyclones specifically engendered by the Gulf Stream's current.

To face a frequently raging sea in a frail skiff was a race to certain disaster.

Ned Land conceded this himself.

So he champed at the bit, in the grip of an intense homesickness that could be cured only by our escape.

"Sir,"

he told me that day, "it's got to stop.

I want to get to the bottom of this.

Your Nemo's veering away from shore and heading up north.

But believe you me, I had my fill at the South Pole and I'm not going with him to the North Pole."

"What can we do, Ned, since it isn't feasible to escape right now?"

"I keep coming back to my idea.

We've got to talk to the captain.

When we were in your own country's seas, you didn't say a word.

Now that we're in mine, I intend to speak up.

Before a few days are out, I figure the Nautilus will lie abreast of Nova Scotia, and from there to Newfoundland is the mouth of a large gulf, and the St.

Lawrence empties into that gulf, and the St.

Lawrence is my own river, the river running by Quebec, my hometown-- and when I think about all this, my gorge rises and my hair stands on end!

Honestly, sir, I'd rather jump overboard!

I can't stay here any longer!

I'm suffocating!"

The Canadian was obviously at the end of his patience.

His vigorous nature couldn't adapt to this protracted imprisonment.

His facial appearance was changing by the day.

His moods grew gloomier and gloomier.

I had a sense of what he was suffering because I also was gripped by homesickness.

Nearly seven months had gone by without our having any news from shore.

Moreover, Captain Nemo's reclusiveness, his changed disposition, and especially his total silence since the battle with the devilfish all made me see things in a different light.

I no longer felt the enthusiasm of our first days on board.

You needed to be Flemish like Conseil to accept these circumstances, living in a habitat designed for cetaceans and other denizens of the deep.

Truly, if that gallant lad had owned gills instead of lungs, I think he would have made an outstanding fish!

"Well, sir?"

Ned Land went on, seeing that I hadn't replied.

"Well, Ned, you want me to ask Captain Nemo what he intends to do with us?"

"Yes, sir."

"Even though he has already made that clear?"

"Yes.

I want it settled once and for all.

Speak just for me, strictly on my behalf, if you want."

"But I rarely encounter him.

He positively avoids me."

"All the more reason you should go look him up."

"I'll confer with him, Ned."

"When?"

the Canadian asked insistently.

"When I encounter him."

"Professor Aronnax, would you like me to go find him myself?"

"No, let me do it.

Tomorrow--"

"Today,"

Ned Land said.

"So be it.

I'll see him today,"

I answered the Canadian, who, if he took action himself, would certainly have ruined everything.

I was left to myself.

His request granted, I decided to dispose of it immediately.

I like things over and done with.

I reentered my stateroom.

From there I could hear movements inside Captain Nemo's quarters.

I couldn't pass up this chance for an encounter.

I knocked on his door.

I received no reply.

I knocked again, then tried the knob.

The door opened.

I entered.

The captain was there.

He was bending over his worktable and hadn't heard me.

Determined not to leave without questioning him, I drew closer.

He looked up sharply, with a frowning brow, and said in a pretty stern tone: "Oh, it's you!

What do you want?"

"To speak with you, captain."

"But I'm busy, sir, I'm at work.

I give you the freedom to enjoy your privacy, can't I have the same for myself?"

This reception was less than encouraging.

But I was determined to give as good as I got.

"Sir,"

I said coolly, "I need to speak with you on a matter that simply can't wait."

"Whatever could that be, sir?"

he replied sarcastically.

"Have you made some discovery that has escaped me?

Has the sea yielded up some novel secret to you?"

We were miles apart.

But before I could reply, he showed me a manuscript open on the table and told me in a more serious tone: "Here, Professor Aronnax, is a manuscript written in several languages.

It contains a summary of my research under the sea, and God willing, it won't perish with me.

Signed with my name, complete with my life story, this manuscript will be enclosed in a small, unsinkable contrivance.

The last surviving man on the Nautilus will throw this contrivance into the sea, and it will go wherever the waves carry it."

The man's name!

His life story written by himself!

So the secret of his existence might someday be unveiled?

But just then I saw this announcement only as a lead-in to my topic.

"Captain,"

I replied, "I'm all praise for this idea you're putting into effect.

The fruits of your research must not be lost.

But the methods you're using strike me as primitive.

Who knows where the winds will take that contrivance, into whose hands it may fall?

Can't you find something better?

Can't you or one of your men--"

"Never, sir,"

the captain said, swiftly interrupting me.

"But my companions and I would be willing to safeguard this manuscript, and if you give us back our freedom--"

"Your freedom!"

Captain Nemo put in, standing up.

"Yes, sir, and that's the subject on which I wanted to confer with you.

For seven months we've been aboard your vessel, and I ask you today, in the name of my companions as well as myself, if you intend to keep us here forever."

"Professor Aronnax,"

Captain Nemo said, "I'll answer you today just as I did seven months ago: whoever boards the Nautilus must never leave it."

"What you're inflicting on us is outright slavery!"

"Call it anything you like."

"But every slave has the right to recover his freedom!

By any worthwhile, available means!"

"Who has denied you that right?"

Captain Nemo replied.

"Did I ever try to bind you with your word of honor?"

The captain stared at me, crossing his arms.

"Sir,"

I told him, "to take up this subject a second time would be distasteful to both of us.

So let's finish what we've started.

I repeat: it isn't just for myself that I raise this issue.

To me, research is a relief, a potent diversion, an enticement, a passion that can make me forget everything else.

Like you, I'm a man neglected and unknown, living in the faint hope that someday I can pass on to future generations the fruits of my labors--figuratively speaking, by means of some contrivance left to the luck of winds and waves.

In short, I can admire you and comfortably go with you while playing a role I only partly understand; but I still catch glimpses of other aspects of your life that are surrounded by involvements and secrets that, alone on board, my companions and I can't share.

And even when our hearts could beat with yours, moved by some of your griefs or stirred by your deeds of courage and genius, we've had to stifle even the slightest token of that sympathy that arises at the sight of something fine and good, whether it comes from friend or enemy.

All right then!

It's this feeling of being alien to your deepest concerns that makes our situation unacceptable, impossible, even impossible for me but especially for Ned Land.

Every man, by virtue of his very humanity, deserves fair treatment.

Have you considered how a love of freedom and hatred of slavery could lead to plans of vengeance in a temperament like the Canadian's, what he might think, attempt, endeavor .

.

.

?"

I fell silent.

Captain Nemo stood up.

"Ned Land can think, attempt, or endeavor anything he wants, what difference is it to me?

I didn't go looking for him!

I don't keep him on board for my pleasure!

As for you, Professor Aronnax, you're a man able to understand anything, even silence.

I have nothing more to say to you.

Let this first time you've come to discuss this subject also be the last, because a second time I won't even listen."

I withdrew.

From that day forward our position was very strained.

I reported this conversation to my two companions.

"Now we know,"

Ned said, "that we can't expect a thing from this man.

The Nautilus is nearing Long Island.

We'll escape, no matter what the weather."

But the skies became more and more threatening.

There were conspicuous signs of a hurricane on the way.

The atmosphere was turning white and milky.

Slender sheaves of cirrus clouds were followed on the horizon by layers of nimbocumulus.

Other low clouds fled swiftly.

The sea grew towering, inflated by long swells.

Every bird had disappeared except a few petrels, friends of the storms.

The barometer fell significantly, indicating a tremendous tension in the surrounding haze.

The mixture in our stormglass decomposed under the influence of the electricity charging the air.

A struggle of the elements was approaching.

The storm burst during the daytime of May 13, just as the Nautilus was cruising abreast of Long Island, a few miles from the narrows to Upper New York Bay.

I'm able to describe this struggle of the elements because Captain Nemo didn't flee into the ocean depths; instead, from some inexplicable whim, he decided to brave it out on the surface.

The wind was blowing from the southwest, initially a stiff breeze, in other words, with a speed of fifteen meters per second, which built to twenty-five meters near three o'clock in the afternoon.

This is the figure for major storms.

Unshaken by these squalls, Captain Nemo stationed himself on the platform.

He was lashed around the waist to withstand the monstrous breakers foaming over the deck.

I hoisted and attached myself to the same place, dividing my wonderment between the storm and this incomparable man who faced it head-on.

The raging sea was swept with huge tattered clouds drenched by the waves.

I saw no more of the small intervening billows that form in the troughs of the big crests.

Just long, soot-colored undulations with crests so compact they didn't foam.

They kept growing taller.

They were spurring each other on.

The Nautilus, sometimes lying on its side, sometimes standing on end like a mast, rolled and pitched frightfully.

Near five o'clock a torrential rain fell, but it lulled neither wind nor sea.

The hurricane was unleashed at a speed of forty-five meters per second, hence almost forty leagues per hour.

Under these conditions houses topple, roof tiles puncture doors, iron railings snap in two, and twenty-four-pounder cannons relocate.

And yet in the midst of this turmoil, the Nautilus lived up to that saying of an expert engineer: "A well-constructed hull can defy any sea!"

This submersible was no resisting rock that waves could demolish; it was a steel spindle, obediently in motion, without rigging or masting, and able to brave their fury with impunity.

Meanwhile I was carefully examining these unleashed breakers.

They measured up to fifteen meters in height over a length of 150 to 175 meters, and the speed of their propagation (half that of the wind) was fifteen meters per second.

Their volume and power increased with the depth of the waters.

I then understood the role played by these waves, which trap air in their flanks and release it in the depths of the sea where its oxygen brings life.

Their utmost pressure--it has been calculated-- can build to 3,000 kilograms on every square foot of surface they strike.

It was such waves in the Hebrides that repositioned a stone block weighing 84,000 pounds.

It was their relatives in the tidal wave on December 23, 1854, that toppled part of the Japanese city of Tokyo, then went that same day at 700 kilometers per hour to break on the beaches of America.

After nightfall the storm grew in intensity.

As in the 1860 cyclone on Runion Island, the barometer fell to 710 millimeters.

At the close of day, I saw a big ship passing on the horizon, struggling painfully.

It lay to at half steam in an effort to hold steady on the waves.

It must have been a steamer on one of those lines out of New York to Liverpool or Le Havre.

It soon vanished into the shadows.

At ten o'clock in the evening, the skies caught on fire.

The air was streaked with violent flashes of lightning.

I couldn't stand this brightness, but Captain Nemo stared straight at it, as if to inhale the spirit of the storm.

A dreadful noise filled the air, a complicated noise made up of the roar of crashing breakers, the howl of the wind, claps of thunder.

The wind shifted to every point of the horizon, and the cyclone left the east to return there after passing through north, west, and south, moving in the opposite direction of revolving storms in the southern hemisphere.

Oh, that Gulf Stream!

It truly lives up to its nickname, the Lord of Storms!

All by itself it creates these fearsome cyclones through the difference in temperature between its currents and the superimposed layers of air.

The rain was followed by a downpour of fire.

Droplets of water changed into exploding tufts.

You would have thought Captain Nemo was courting a death worthy of himself, seeking to be struck by lightning.

In one hideous pitching movement, the Nautilus reared its steel spur into the air like a lightning rod, and I saw long sparks shoot down it.

Shattered, at the end of my strength, I slid flat on my belly to the hatch.

I opened it and went below to the lounge.

By then the storm had reached its maximum intensity.

It was impossible to stand upright inside the Nautilus.

Captain Nemo reentered near midnight.

I could hear the ballast tanks filling little by little, and the Nautilus sank gently beneath the surface of the waves.

Through the lounge's open windows, I saw large, frightened fish passing like phantoms in the fiery waters.

Some were struck by lightning right before my eyes!

The Nautilus kept descending.

I thought it would find calm again at fifteen meters down.

No.

The upper strata were too violently agitated.

It needed to sink to fifty meters, searching for a resting place in the bowels of the sea.

But once there, what tranquility we found, what silence, what peace all around us!

Who would have known that a dreadful hurricane was then unleashed on the surface of this ocean?

In Latitude 47 degrees 24' and Longitude 17 degrees 28' IN THE AFTERMATH of this storm, we were thrown back to the east.

Away went any hope of escaping to the landing places of New York or the St.

Lawrence.

In despair, poor Ned went into seclusion like Captain Nemo.

Conseil and I no longer left each other.

As I said, the Nautilus veered to the east.

To be more accurate, I should have said to the northeast.

Sometimes on the surface of the waves, sometimes beneath them, the ship wandered for days amid these mists so feared by navigators.

These are caused chiefly by melting ice, which keeps the air extremely damp.

How many ships have perished in these waterways as they tried to get directions from the hazy lights on the coast!

How many casualties have been caused by these opaque mists!

How many collisions have occurred with these reefs, where the breaking surf is covered by the noise of the wind!

How many vessels have rammed each other, despite their running lights, despite the warnings given by their bosun's pipes and alarm bells!

So the floor of this sea had the appearance of a battlefield where every ship defeated by the ocean still lay, some already old and encrusted, others newer and reflecting our beacon light on their ironwork and copper undersides.

Among these vessels, how many went down with all hands, with their crews and hosts of immigrants, at these trouble spots so prominent in the statistics: Cape Race, St.

Paul Island, the Strait of Belle Isle, the St.

Lawrence estuary!

And in only a few years, how many victims have been furnished to the obituary notices by the Royal Mail, Inman, and Montreal lines; by vessels named the Solway, the Isis, the Paramatta, the Hungarian, the Canadian, the Anglo-Saxon, the Humboldt, and the United States, all run aground; by the Arctic and the Lyonnais, sunk in collisions; by the President, the Pacific, and the City of Glasgow, lost for reasons unknown; in the midst of their gloomy rubble, the Nautilus navigated as if passing the dead in review!

By May 15 we were off the southern tip of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland.

These banks are the result of marine sedimentation, an extensive accumulation of organic waste brought either from the equator by the Gulf Stream's current, or from the North Pole by the countercurrent of cold water that skirts the American coast.

Here, too, erratically drifting chunks collect from the ice breakup.

Here a huge boneyard forms from fish, mollusks, and zoophytes dying over it by the billions.

The sea is of no great depth at the Grand Banks.

A few hundred fathoms at best.

But to the south there is a deep, suddenly occurring depression, a 3,000-meter pit.

Here the Gulf Stream widens.

Its waters come to full bloom.

It loses its speed and temperature, but it turns into a sea.

Among the fish that the Nautilus startled on its way, I'll mention a one-meter lumpfish, blackish on top with orange on the belly and rare among its brethren in that it practices monogamy, a good-sized eelpout, a type of emerald moray whose flavor is excellent, wolffish with big eyes in a head somewhat resembling a canine's, viviparous blennies whose eggs hatch inside their bodies like those of snakes, bloated gobio (or black gudgeon) measuring two decimeters, grenadiers with long tails and gleaming with a silvery glow, speedy fish venturing far from their High Arctic seas.

Our nets also hauled in a bold, daring, vigorous, and muscular fish armed with prickles on its head and stings on its fins, a real scorpion measuring two to three meters, the ruthless enemy of cod, blennies, and salmon; it was the bullhead of the northerly seas, a fish with red fins and a brown body covered with nodules.

The Nautilus's fishermen had some trouble getting a grip on this animal, which, thanks to the formation of its gill covers, can protect its respiratory organs from any parching contact with the air and can live out of water for a good while.

And I'll mention--for the record--some little banded blennies that follow ships into the northernmost seas, sharp-snouted carp exclusive to the north Atlantic, scorpionfish, and lastly the gadoid family, chiefly the cod species, which I detected in their waters of choice over these inexhaustible Grand Banks.

Because Newfoundland is simply an underwater peak, you could call these cod mountain fish.

While the Nautilus was clearing a path through their tight ranks, Conseil couldn't refrain from making this comment: "Mercy, look at these cod!"

he said.

"Why, I thought cod were flat, like dab or sole!"

"Innocent boy!"

I exclaimed.

"Cod are flat only at the grocery store, where they're cut open and spread out on display.

But in the water they're like mullet, spindle-shaped and perfectly built for speed."

"I can easily believe master,"

Conseil replied.

"But what crowds of them!

What swarms!"

"Bah!

My friend, there'd be many more without their enemies, scorpionfish and human beings!

Do you know how many eggs have been counted in a single female?"

"I'll go all out,"

Conseil replied.

"500,000."

"11,000,000, my friend."

"11,000,000!

I refuse to accept that until I count them myself."

"So count them, Conseil.

But it would be less work to believe me.

Besides, Frenchmen, Englishmen, Americans, Danes, and Norwegians catch these cod by the thousands.

They're eaten in prodigious quantities, and without the astonishing fertility of these fish, the seas would soon be depopulated of them.

Accordingly, in England and America alone, 5,000 ships manned by 75,000 seamen go after cod.

Each ship brings back an average catch of 4,400 fish, making 22,000,000.

Off the coast of Norway, the total is the same."

"Fine,"

Conseil replied, "I'll take master's word for it.

I won't count them."

"Count what?"

"Those 11,000,000 eggs.

But I'll make one comment."

"What's that?"

"If all their eggs hatched, just four codfish could feed England, America, and Norway."

As we skimmed the depths of the Grand Banks, I could see perfectly those long fishing lines, each armed with 200 hooks, that every boat dangled by the dozens.

The lower end of each line dragged the bottom by means of a small grappling iron, and at the surface it was secured to the buoy-rope of a cork float.

The Nautilus had to maneuver shrewdly in the midst of this underwater spiderweb.

But the ship didn't stay long in these heavily traveled waterways.

It went up to about latitude 42 degrees.

This brought it abreast of St.

John's in Newfoundland and Heart's Content, where the Atlantic Cable reaches its end point.

Instead of continuing north, the Nautilus took an easterly heading, as if to go along this plateau on which the telegraph cable rests, where multiple soundings have given the contours of the terrain with the utmost accuracy.

It was on May 17, about 500 miles from Heart's Content and 2,800 meters down, that I spotted this cable lying on the seafloor.

Conseil, whom I hadn't alerted, mistook it at first for a gigantic sea snake and was gearing up to classify it in his best manner.

But I enlightened the fine lad and let him down gently by giving him various details on the laying of this cable.

The first cable was put down during the years 1857-1858; but after transmitting about 400 telegrams, it went dead.

In 1863 engineers built a new cable that measured 3,400 kilometers, weighed 4,500 metric tons, and was shipped aboard the Great Eastern.

This attempt also failed.

Now then, on May 25 while submerged to a depth of 3,836 meters, the Nautilus lay in precisely the locality where this second cable suffered the rupture that ruined the undertaking.

It happened 638 miles from the coast of Ireland.

At around two o'clock in the afternoon, all contact with Europe broke off.

The electricians on board decided to cut the cable before fishing it up, and by eleven o'clock that evening they had retrieved the damaged part.

They repaired the joint and its splice; then the cable was resubmerged.

But a few days later it snapped again and couldn't be recovered from the ocean depths.

These Americans refused to give up.

The daring Cyrus Field, who had risked his whole fortune to promote this undertaking, called for a new bond issue.

It sold out immediately.

Another cable was put down under better conditions.

Its sheaves of conducting wire were insulated within a gutta-percha covering, which was protected by a padding of textile material enclosed in a metal sheath.

The Great Eastern put back to sea on July 13, 1866.

The operation proceeded apace.

Yet there was one hitch.

As they gradually unrolled this third cable, the electricians observed on several occasions that someone had recently driven nails into it, trying to damage its core.

Captain Anderson, his officers, and the engineers put their heads together, then posted a warning that if the culprit were detected, he would be thrown overboard without a trial.

After that, these villainous attempts were not repeated.

By July 23 the Great Eastern was lying no farther than 800 kilometers from Newfoundland when it received telegraphed news from Ireland of an armistice signed between Prussia and Austria after the Battle of Sadova.

Through the mists on the 27th, it sighted the port of Heart's Content.

The undertaking had ended happily, and in its first dispatch, young America addressed old Europe with these wise words so rarely understood: "Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth to men of good will."

I didn't expect to find this electric cable in mint condition, as it looked on leaving its place of manufacture.

The long snake was covered with seashell rubble and bristling with foraminifera; a crust of caked gravel protected it from any mollusks that might bore into it.

It rested serenely, sheltered from the sea's motions, under a pressure favorable to the transmission of that electric spark that goes from America to Europe in 32/100 of a second.

This cable will no doubt last indefinitely because, as observers note, its gutta-percha casing is improved by a stay in salt water.

Besides, on this well-chosen plateau, the cable never lies at depths that could cause a break.

The Nautilus followed it to its lowest reaches, located 4,431 meters down, and even there it rested without any stress or strain.

Then we returned to the locality where the 1863 accident had taken place.

There the ocean floor formed a valley 120 kilometers wide, into which you could fit Mt.

Blanc without its summit poking above the surface of the waves.

This valley is closed off to the east by a sheer wall 2,000 meters high.

We arrived there on May 28, and the Nautilus lay no farther than 150 kilometers from Ireland.

Would Captain Nemo head up north and beach us on the British Isles?

No.

Much to my surprise, he went back down south and returned to European seas.

As we swung around the Emerald Isle, I spotted Cape Clear for an instant, plus the lighthouse on Fastnet Rock that guides all those thousands of ships setting out from Glasgow or Liverpool.

An important question then popped into my head.

Would the Nautilus dare to tackle the English Channel?

Ned Land (who promptly reappeared after we hugged shore) never stopped questioning me.

What could I answer him?

Captain Nemo remained invisible.

After giving the Canadian a glimpse of American shores, was he about to show me the coast of France?

But the Nautilus kept gravitating southward.

On May 30, in sight of Land's End, it passed between the lowermost tip of England and the Scilly Islands, which it left behind to starboard.

If it was going to enter the English Channel, it clearly needed to head east.

It did not.

All day long on May 31, the Nautilus swept around the sea in a series of circles that had me deeply puzzled.

It seemed to be searching for a locality that it had some trouble finding.

At noon Captain Nemo himself came to take our bearings.

He didn't address a word to me.

He looked gloomier than ever.

What was filling him with such sadness?

Was it our proximity to these European shores?

Was he reliving his memories of that country he had left behind?

If so, what did he feel?

Remorse or regret?

For a good while these thoughts occupied my mind, and I had a hunch that fate would soon give away the captain's secrets.

The next day, June 1, the Nautilus kept to the same tack.

It was obviously trying to locate some precise spot in the ocean.

Just as on the day before, Captain Nemo came to take the altitude of the sun.

The sea was smooth, the skies clear.

Eight miles to the east, a big steamship was visible on the horizon line.

No flag was flapping from the gaff of its fore-and-aft sail, and I couldn't tell its nationality.

A few minutes before the sun passed its zenith, Captain Nemo raised his sextant and took his sights with the utmost precision.

The absolute calm of the waves facilitated this operation.

The Nautilus lay motionless, neither rolling nor pitching.

I was on the platform just then.

After determining our position, the captain pronounced only these words: "It's right here!"

He went down the hatch.

Had he seen that vessel change course and seemingly head toward us?

I'm unable to say.

I returned to the lounge.

The hatch closed, and I heard water hissing in the ballast tanks.

The Nautilus began to sink on a vertical line, because its propeller was in check and no longer furnished any forward motion.

Some minutes later it stopped at a depth of 833 meters and came to rest on the seafloor.

The ceiling lights in the lounge then went out, the panels opened, and through the windows I saw, for a half-mile radius, the sea brightly lit by the beacon's rays.

I looked to port and saw nothing but the immenseness of these tranquil waters.

To starboard, a prominent bulge on the sea bottom caught my attention.

You would have thought it was some ruin enshrouded in a crust of whitened seashells, as if under a mantle of snow.

Carefully examining this mass, I could identify the swollen outlines of a ship shorn of its masts, which must have sunk bow first.

This casualty certainly dated from some far-off time.

To be so caked with the limestone of these waters, this wreckage must have spent many a year on the ocean floor.

What ship was this?

Why had the Nautilus come to visit its grave?

Was it something other than a maritime accident that had dragged this craft under the waters?

I wasn't sure what to think, but next to me I heard Captain Nemo's voice slowly say: "Originally this ship was christened the Marseillais.

It carried seventy-four cannons and was launched in 1762.

On August 13, 1778, commanded by La Poype-Vertrieux, it fought valiantly against the Preston.

On July 4, 1779, as a member of the squadron under Admiral d'Estaing, it assisted in the capture of the island of Grenada.

On September 5, 1781, under the Count de Grasse, of France changed the name of this ship.

On April 16 of that same year, it joined the squadron at Brest under Rear Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse, who was entrusted with escorting a convoy of wheat coming from America under the command of Admiral Van Stabel.

In this second year of the French Revolutionary Calendar, on the 11th and 12th days in the Month of Pasture, this squadron fought an encounter with English vessels.

Sir, today is June 1, 1868, or the 13th day in the Month of Pasture.

Seventy-four years ago to the day, at this very spot in latitude 47 degrees 24' and longitude 17 degrees 28', this ship sank after a heroic battle; its three masts gone, water in its hold, a third of its crew out of action, it preferred to go to the bottom with its 356 seamen rather than surrender; and with its flag nailed up on the afterdeck, it disappeared beneath the waves to shouts of 'Long live the Republic!'"

"This is the Avenger!"

I exclaimed.

"Yes, sir!

The Avenger!

A splendid name!"

Captain Nemo murmured, crossing his arms.

A Mass Execution THE WAY HE SAID THIS, the unexpectedness of this scene, first the biography of this patriotic ship, then the excitement with which this eccentric individual pronounced these last words--the name Avenger whose significance could not escape me--all this, taken together, had a profound impact on my mind.

My eyes never left the captain.

Hands outstretched toward the sea, he contemplated the proud wreck with blazing eyes.

Perhaps I would never learn who he was, where he came from or where he was heading, but more and more I could see a distinction between the man and the scientist.

It was no ordinary misanthropy that kept Captain Nemo and his companions sequestered inside the Nautilus's plating, but a hate so monstrous or so sublime that the passing years could never weaken it.

Did this hate also hunger for vengeance?

Time would soon tell.

Meanwhile the Nautilus rose slowly to the surface of the sea, and I watched the Avenger's murky shape disappearing little by little.

Soon a gentle rolling told me that we were afloat in the open air.

Just then a hollow explosion was audible.

I looked at the captain.

The captain did not stir.

"Captain?"

I said.

He didn't reply.

I left him and climbed onto the platform.

Conseil and the Canadian were already there.

"What caused that explosion?"

I asked.

"A cannon going off,"

Ned Land replied.

I stared in the direction of the ship I had spotted.

It was heading toward the Nautilus, and you could tell it had put on steam.

Six miles separated it from us.

"What sort of craft is it, Ned?"

"From its rigging and its low masts,"

the Canadian replied, "I bet it's a warship.

Here's hoping it pulls up and sinks this damned Nautilus!"

"Ned my friend,"

Conseil replied, "what harm could it do the Nautilus?

Will it attack us under the waves?

Will it cannonade us at the bottom of the sea?"

"Tell me, Ned,"

I asked, "can you make out the nationality of that craft?"

Creasing his brow, lowering his lids, and puckering the corners of his eyes, the Canadian focused the full power of his gaze on the ship for a short while.

"No, sir,"

he replied.

"I can't make out what nation it's from.

It's flying no flag.

But I'll swear it's a warship, because there's a long pennant streaming from the peak of its mainmast."

For a quarter of an hour, we continued to watch the craft bearing down on us.

But it was inconceivable to me that it had discovered the Nautilus at such a distance, still less that it knew what this underwater machine really was.

Soon the Canadian announced that the craft was a big battleship, a double-decker ironclad complete with ram.

Dark, dense smoke burst from its two funnels.

Its furled sails merged with the lines of its yardarms.

The gaff of its fore-and-aft sail flew no flag.

Its distance still kept us from distinguishing the colors of its pennant, which was fluttering like a thin ribbon.

It was coming on fast.

If Captain Nemo let it approach, a chance for salvation might be available to us.

"Sir,"

Ned Land told me, "if that boat gets within a mile of us, I'm jumping overboard, and I suggest you follow suit."

I didn't reply to the Canadian's proposition but kept watching the ship, which was looming larger on the horizon.

Whether it was English, French, American, or Russian, it would surely welcome us aboard if we could just get to it.

"Master may recall,"

Conseil then said, "that we have some experience with swimming.

He can rely on me to tow him to that vessel, if he's agreeable to going with our friend Ned."

Before I could reply, white smoke streamed from the battleship's bow.

Then, a few seconds later, the waters splashed astern of the Nautilus, disturbed by the fall of a heavy object.

Soon after, an explosion struck my ears.

"What's this?

They're firing at us!"

I exclaimed.

"Good lads!"

the Canadian muttered.

"That means they don't see us as castaways clinging to some wreckage!"

"With all due respect to master--gracious!"

Conseil put in, shaking off the water that had sprayed over him from another shell.

"With all due respect to master, they've discovered the narwhale and they're cannonading the same."

"But it must be clear to them,"

I exclaimed, "that they're dealing with human beings."

"Maybe that's why!"

Ned Land replied, staring hard at me.

The full truth dawned on me.

Undoubtedly people now knew where they stood on the existence of this so-called monster.

Undoubtedly the latter's encounter with the Abraham Lincoln, when the Canadian hit it with his harpoon, had led Commander Farragut to recognize the narwhale as actually an underwater boat, more dangerous than any unearthly cetacean!

Yes, this had to be the case, and undoubtedly they were now chasing this dreadful engine of destruction on every sea!

Dreadful indeed, if, as we could assume, Captain Nemo had been using the Nautilus in works of vengeance!

That night in the middle of the Indian Ocean, when he imprisoned us in the cell, hadn't he attacked some ship?

That man now buried in the coral cemetery, wasn't he the victim of some collision caused by the Nautilus?

Yes, I repeat: this had to be the case.

One part of Captain Nemo's secret life had been unveiled.

And now, even though his identity was still unknown, at least the nations allied against him knew they were no longer hunting some fairy-tale monster, but a man who had sworn an implacable hate toward them!

This whole fearsome sequence of events appeared in my mind's eye.

Instead of encountering friends on this approaching ship, we would find only pitiless enemies.

Meanwhile shells fell around us in increasing numbers.

Some, meeting the liquid surface, would ricochet and vanish into the sea at considerable distances.

But none of them reached the Nautilus.

By then the ironclad was no more than three miles off.

Despite its violent cannonade, Captain Nemo hadn't appeared on the platform.

And yet if one of those conical shells had scored a routine hit on the Nautilus's hull, it could have been fatal to him.

The Canadian then told me: "Sir, we've got to do everything we can to get out of this jam!

Let's signal them!

Damnation!

Maybe they'll realize we're decent people!"

Ned Land pulled out his handkerchief to wave it in the air.

But he had barely unfolded it when he was felled by an iron fist, and despite his great strength, he tumbled to the deck.

"Scum!"

the captain shouted.

"Do you want to be nailed to the Nautilus's spur before it charges that ship?"

Dreadful to hear, Captain Nemo was even more dreadful to see.

His face was pale from some spasm of his heart, which must have stopped beating for an instant.

His pupils were hideously contracted.

His voice was no longer speaking, it was bellowing.

Bending from the waist, he shook the Canadian by the shoulders.

Then, dropping Ned and turning to the battleship, whose shells were showering around him: "O ship of an accursed nation, you know who I am!"

he shouted in his powerful voice.

"And I don't need your colors to recognize you!

Look!

I'll show you mine!"

And in the bow of the platform, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag, like the one he had left planted at the South Pole.

Just then a shell hit the Nautilus's hull obliquely, failed to breach it, ricocheted near the captain, and vanished into the sea.

Captain Nemo shrugged his shoulders.

Then, addressing me: "Go below!"

he told me in a curt tone.

"You and your companions, go below!"

"Sir,"

I exclaimed, "are you going to attack this ship?"

"Sir, I'm going to sink it."

"You wouldn't!"

"I will,"

Captain Nemo replied icily.

"You're ill-advised to pass judgment on me, sir.

Fate has shown you what you weren't meant to see.

The attack has come.

Our reply will be dreadful.

Get back inside!"

"From what country is that ship?"

"You don't know?

Fine, so much the better!

At least its nationality will remain a secret to you.

Go below!"

The Canadian, Conseil, and I could only obey.

Some fifteen of the Nautilus's seamen surrounded their captain and stared with a feeling of implacable hate at the ship bearing down on them.

You could feel the same spirit of vengeance enkindling their every soul.

I went below just as another projectile scraped the Nautilus's hull, and I heard the captain exclaim: "Shoot, you demented vessel!

Shower your futile shells!

You won't escape the Nautilus's spur!

But this isn't the place where you'll perish!

I don't want your wreckage mingling with that of the Avenger!"

I repaired to my stateroom.

The captain and his chief officer stayed on the platform.

The propeller was set in motion.

The Nautilus swiftly retreated, putting us outside the range of the vessel's shells.

But the chase continued, and Captain Nemo was content to keep his distance.

Near four o'clock in the afternoon, unable to control the impatience and uneasiness devouring me, I went back to the central companionway.

The hatch was open.

I ventured onto the platform.

The captain was still strolling there, his steps agitated.

He stared at the ship, which stayed to his leeward five or six miles off.

He was circling it like a wild beast, drawing it eastward, letting it chase after him.

Yet he didn't attack.

Was he, perhaps, still undecided?

I tried to intervene one last time.

But I had barely queried Captain Nemo when the latter silenced me: "I'm the law, I'm the tribunal!

I'm the oppressed, and there are my oppressors!

Thanks to them, I've witnessed the destruction of everything I loved, cherished, and venerated--homeland, wife, children, father, and mother!

There lies everything I hate!

Not another word out of you!"

I took a last look at the battleship, which was putting on steam.

Then I rejoined Ned and Conseil.

"We'll escape!"

I exclaimed.

"Good,"

Ned put in.

"Where's that ship from?"

"I've no idea.

But wherever it's from, it will sink before nightfall.

In any event, it's better to perish with it than be accomplices in some act of revenge whose merits we can't gauge."

"That's my feeling,"

Ned Land replied coolly.

"Let's wait for nightfall."

Night fell.

A profound silence reigned on board.

The compass indicated that the Nautilus hadn't changed direction.

I could hear the beat of its propeller, churning the waves with steady speed.

Staying on the surface of the water, it rolled gently, sometimes to one side, sometimes to the other.

My companions and I had decided to escape as soon as the vessel came close enough for us to be heard--or seen, because the moon would wax full in three days and was shining brightly.

Once we were aboard that ship, if we couldn't ward off the blow that threatened it, at least we could do everything that circumstances permitted.

Several times I thought the Nautilus was about to attack.

But it was content to let its adversary approach, and then it would quickly resume its retreating ways.

Part of the night passed without incident.

We kept watch for an opportunity to take action.

We talked little, being too keyed up.

Ned Land was all for jumping overboard.

I forced him to wait.

As I saw it, the Nautilus would attack the double-decker on the surface of the waves, and then it would be not only possible but easy to escape.

At three o'clock in the morning, full of uneasiness, I climbed onto the platform.

Captain Nemo hadn't left it.

He stood in the bow next to his flag, which a mild breeze was unfurling above his head.

His eyes never left that vessel.

The extraordinary intensity of his gaze seemed to attract it, beguile it, and draw it more surely than if he had it in tow!

The moon then passed its zenith.

Jupiter was rising in the east.

In the midst of this placid natural setting, sky and ocean competed with each other in tranquility, and the sea offered the orb of night the loveliest mirror ever to reflect its image.

And when I compared this deep calm of the elements with all the fury seething inside the plating of this barely perceptible Nautilus, I shivered all over.

The vessel was two miles off.

It drew nearer, always moving toward the phosphorescent glow that signaled the Nautilus's presence.

I saw its green and red running lights, plus the white lantern hanging from the large stay of its foremast.

Hazy flickerings were reflected on its rigging and indicated that its furnaces were pushed to the limit.

Showers of sparks and cinders of flaming coal escaped from its funnels, spangling the air with stars.

I stood there until six o'clock in the morning, Captain Nemo never seeming to notice me.

The vessel lay a mile and a half off, and with the first glimmers of daylight, it resumed its cannonade.

The time couldn't be far away when the Nautilus would attack its adversary, and my companions and I would leave forever this man I dared not judge.

I was about to go below to alert them, when the chief officer climbed onto the platform.

Several seamen were with him.

Captain Nemo didn't see them, or didn't want to see them.

They carried out certain procedures that, on the Nautilus, you could call "clearing the decks for action."

They were quite simple.

The manropes that formed a handrail around the platform were lowered.

Likewise the pilothouse and the beacon housing were withdrawn into the hull until they lay exactly flush with it.

The surface of this long sheet-iron cigar no longer offered a single protrusion that could hamper its maneuvers.

I returned to the lounge.

The Nautilus still emerged above the surface.

A few morning gleams infiltrated the liquid strata.

Beneath the undulations of the billows, the windows were enlivened by the blushing of the rising sun.

That dreadful day of June 2 had dawned.

At seven o'clock the log told me that the Nautilus had reduced speed.

I realized that it was letting the warship approach.

Moreover, the explosions grew more intensely audible.

Shells furrowed the water around us, drilling through it with an odd hissing sound.

"My friends,"

I said, "it's time.

Let's shake hands, and may God be with us!"

Ned Land was determined, Conseil calm, I myself nervous and barely in control.

We went into the library.

Just as I pushed open the door leading to the well of the central companionway, I heard the hatch close sharply overhead.

The Canadian leaped up the steps, but I stopped him.

A well-known hissing told me that water was entering the ship's ballast tanks.

Indeed, in a few moments the Nautilus had submerged some meters below the surface of the waves.

I understood this maneuver.

It was too late to take action.

The Nautilus wasn't going to strike the double-decker where it was clad in impenetrable iron armor, but below its waterline, where the metal carapace no longer protected its planking.

We were prisoners once more, unwilling spectators at the performance of this gruesome drama.

But we barely had time to think.

Taking refuge in my stateroom, we stared at each other without pronouncing a word.

My mind was in a total daze.

My mental processes came to a dead stop.

I hovered in that painful state that predominates during the period of anticipation before some frightful explosion.

I waited, I listened, I lived only through my sense of hearing!

Meanwhile the Nautilus's speed had increased appreciably.

So it was gathering momentum.

Its entire hull was vibrating.

Suddenly I let out a yell.

There had been a collision, but it was comparatively mild.

I could feel the penetrating force of the steel spur.

I could hear scratchings and scrapings.

Carried away with its driving power, the Nautilus had passed through the vessel's mass like a sailmaker's needle through canvas!

I couldn't hold still.

Frantic, going insane, I leaped out of my stateroom and rushed into the lounge.

Captain Nemo was there.

Mute, gloomy, implacable, he was staring through the port panel.

An enormous mass was sinking beneath the waters, and the Nautilus, missing none of its death throes, was descending into the depths with it.

Ten meters away, I could see its gaping hull, into which water was rushing with a sound of thunder, then its double rows of cannons and railings.

Its deck was covered with dark, quivering shadows.

The water was rising.

Those poor men leaped up into the shrouds, clung to the masts, writhed beneath the waters.

It was a human anthill that an invading sea had caught by surprise!

Paralyzed, rigid with anguish, my hair standing on end, my eyes popping out of my head, short of breath, suffocating, speechless, I stared-- I too!

I was glued to the window by an irresistible allure!

The enormous vessel settled slowly.

Following it down, the Nautilus kept watch on its every movement.

Suddenly there was an eruption.

The air compressed inside the craft sent its decks flying, as if the powder stores had been ignited.

The thrust of the waters was so great, the Nautilus swerved away.

The poor ship then sank more swiftly.

Its mastheads appeared, laden with victims, then its crosstrees bending under clusters of men, finally the peak of its mainmast.

Then the dark mass disappeared, and with it a crew of corpses dragged under by fearsome eddies.

.

.

.

I turned to Captain Nemo.

This dreadful executioner, this true archangel of hate, was still staring.

When it was all over, Captain Nemo headed to the door of his stateroom, opened it, and entered.

I followed him with my eyes.

On the rear paneling, beneath the portraits of his heroes, I saw the portrait of a still-youthful woman with two little children.

Captain Nemo stared at them for a few moments, stretched out his arms to them, sank to his knees, and melted into sobs.

The Last Words of Captain Nemo THE PANELS CLOSED over this frightful view, but the lights didn't go on in the lounge.

Inside the Nautilus all was gloom and silence.

It left this place of devastation with prodigious speed, 100 feet beneath the waters.

Where was it going?

North or south?

Where would the man flee after this horrible act of revenge?

I reentered my stateroom, where Ned and Conseil were waiting silently.

Captain Nemo filled me with insurmountable horror.

Whatever he had once suffered at the hands of humanity, he had no right to mete out such punishment.

He had made me, if not an accomplice, at least an eyewitness to his vengeance!

Even this was intolerable.

At eleven o'clock the electric lights came back on.

I went into the lounge.

It was deserted.

I consulted the various instruments.

The Nautilus was fleeing northward at a speed of twenty-five miles per hour, sometimes on the surface of the sea, sometimes thirty feet beneath it.

After our position had been marked on the chart, I saw that we were passing into the mouth of the English Channel, that our heading would take us to the northernmost seas with incomparable speed.

I could barely glimpse the swift passing of longnose sharks, hammerhead sharks, spotted dogfish that frequent these waters, big eagle rays, swarms of seahorse looking like knights on a chessboard, eels quivering like fireworks serpents, armies of crab that fled obliquely by crossing their pincers over their carapaces, finally schools of porpoise that held contests of speed with the Nautilus.

But by this point observing, studying, and classifying were out of the question.

By evening we had cleared 200 leagues up the Atlantic.

Shadows gathered and gloom overran the sea until the moon came up.

I repaired to my stateroom.

I couldn't sleep.

I was assaulted by nightmares.

That horrible scene of destruction kept repeating in my mind's eye.

From that day forward, who knows where the Nautilus took us in the north Atlantic basin?

Always at incalculable speed!

Always amid the High Arctic mists!

Did it call at the capes of Spitzbergen or the shores of Novaya Zemlya?

Did it visit such uncharted seas as the White Sea, the Kara Sea, the Gulf of Ob, the Lyakhov Islands, or those unknown beaches on the Siberian coast?

I'm unable to say.

I lost track of the passing hours.

Time was in abeyance on the ship's clocks.

As happens in the polar regions, it seemed that night and day no longer followed their normal sequence.

I felt myself being drawn into that strange domain where the overwrought imagination of Edgar Allan Poe was at home.

Like his fabled Arthur Gordon Pym, I expected any moment to see that "shrouded human figure, very far larger in its proportions than any dweller among men,"

thrown across the cataract that protects the outskirts of the pole!

I estimate--but perhaps I'm mistaken--that the Nautilus's haphazard course continued for fifteen or twenty days, and I'm not sure how long this would have gone on without the catastrophe that ended our voyage.

As for Captain Nemo, he was no longer in the picture.

As for his chief officer, the same applied.

Not one crewman was visible for a single instant.

The Nautilus cruised beneath the waters almost continuously.

When it rose briefly to the surface to renew our air, the hatches opened and closed as if automated.

No more positions were reported on the world map.

I didn't know where we were.

I'll also mention that the Canadian, at the end of his strength and patience, made no further appearances.

Conseil couldn't coax a single word out of him and feared that, in a fit of delirium while under the sway of a ghastly homesickness, Ned would kill himself.

So he kept a devoted watch on his friend every instant.

You can appreciate that under these conditions, our situation had become untenable.

One morning--whose date I'm unable to specify--I was slumbering near the first hours of daylight, a painful, sickly slumber.

Waking up, I saw Ned Land leaning over me, and I heard him tell me in a low voice: "We're going to escape!"

I sat up.

"When?"

I asked.

"Tonight.

There doesn't seem to be any supervision left on the Nautilus.

You'd think a total daze was reigning on board.

Will you be ready, sir?"

"Yes.

Where are we?"

"In sight of land.

I saw it through the mists just this morning, twenty miles to the east."

"What land is it?"

"I've no idea, but whatever it is, there we'll take refuge."

"Yes, Ned!

We'll escape tonight even if the sea swallows us up!"

"The sea's rough, the wind's blowing hard, but a twenty-mile run in the Nautilus's nimble longboat doesn't scare me.

Unknown to the crew, I've stowed some food and flasks of water inside."

"I'm with you."

"What's more,"

the Canadian added, "if they catch me, I'll defend myself, I'll fight to the death."

"Then we'll die together, Ned my friend."

My mind was made up.

The Canadian left me.

I went out on the platform, where I could barely stand upright against the jolts of the billows.

The skies were threatening, but land lay inside those dense mists, and we had to escape.

Not a single day, or even a single hour, could we afford to lose.

I returned to the lounge, dreading yet desiring an encounter with Captain Nemo, wanting yet not wanting to see him.

What would I say to him?

How could I hide the involuntary horror he inspired in me?

No!

It was best not to meet him face to face!

Best to try and forget him!

And yet .

.

.

!

How long that day seemed, the last I would spend aboard the Nautilus!

I was left to myself.

Ned Land and Conseil avoided speaking to me, afraid they would give themselves away.

At six o'clock I ate supper, but I had no appetite.

Despite my revulsion, I forced it down, wanting to keep my strength up.

At 6:30 Ned Land entered my stateroom.

He told me: "We won't see each other again before we go.

At ten o'clock the moon won't be up yet.

We'll take advantage of the darkness.

Come to the skiff.

Conseil and I will be inside waiting for you."

The Canadian left without giving me time to answer him.

I wanted to verify the Nautilus's heading.

I made my way to the lounge.

We were racing north-northeast with frightful speed, fifty meters down.

I took one last look at the natural wonders and artistic treasures amassed in the museum, this unrivaled collection doomed to perish someday in the depths of the seas, together with its curator.

I wanted to establish one supreme impression in my mind.

I stayed there an hour, basking in the aura of the ceiling lights, passing in review the treasures shining in their glass cases.

Then I returned to my stateroom.

There I dressed in sturdy seafaring clothes.

I gathered my notes and packed them tenderly about my person.

My heart was pounding mightily.

I couldn't curb its pulsations.

My anxiety and agitation would certainly have given me away if Captain Nemo had seen me.

What was he doing just then?

I listened at the door to his stateroom.

I heard the sound of footsteps.

Captain Nemo was inside.

He hadn't gone to bed.

With his every movement I imagined he would appear and ask me why I wanted to escape!

I felt in a perpetual state of alarm.

My imagination magnified this sensation.

The feeling became so acute, I wondered whether it wouldn't be better to enter the captain's stateroom, dare him face to face, brave it out with word and deed!

It was an insane idea.

Fortunately I controlled myself and stretched out on the bed to soothe my bodily agitation.

My nerves calmed a little, but with my brain so aroused, I did a swift review of my whole existence aboard the Nautilus, every pleasant or unpleasant incident that had crossed my path since I went overboard from the Abraham Lincoln: the underwater hunting trip, the Torres Strait, our running aground, the savages of Papua, the coral cemetery, the Suez passageway, the island of Santorini, the Cretan diver, the Bay of Vigo, Atlantis, the Ice Bank, the South Pole, our imprisonment in the ice, the battle with the devilfish, the storm in the Gulf Stream, the Avenger, and that horrible scene of the vessel sinking with its crew .

.

.

!

All these events passed before my eyes like backdrops unrolling upstage in a theater.

In this strange setting Captain Nemo then grew fantastically.

His features were accentuated, taking on superhuman proportions.

He was no longer my equal, he was the Man of the Waters, the Spirit of the Seas.

By then it was 9:30.

I held my head in both hands to keep it from bursting.

I closed my eyes.

I no longer wanted to think.

A half hour still to wait!

A half hour of nightmares that could drive me insane!

Just then I heard indistinct chords from the organ, melancholy harmonies from some undefinable hymn, actual pleadings from a soul trying to sever its earthly ties.

I listened with all my senses at once, barely breathing, immersed like Captain Nemo in this musical trance that was drawing him beyond the bounds of this world.

Then a sudden thought terrified me.

Captain Nemo had left his stateroom.

He was in the same lounge I had to cross in order to escape.

There I would encounter him one last time.

He would see me, perhaps speak to me!

One gesture from him could obliterate me, a single word shackle me to his vessel!

Even so, ten o'clock was about to strike.

It was time to leave my stateroom and rejoin my companions.

I dared not hesitate, even if Captain Nemo stood before me.

I opened the door cautiously, but as it swung on its hinges, it seemed to make a frightful noise.

This noise existed, perhaps, only in my imagination!

I crept forward through the Nautilus's dark gangways, pausing after each step to curb the pounding of my heart.

I arrived at the corner door of the lounge.

I opened it gently.

The lounge was plunged in profound darkness.

Chords from the organ were reverberating faintly.

Captain Nemo was there.

He didn't see me.

Even in broad daylight I doubt that he would have noticed me, so completely was he immersed in his trance.

I inched over the carpet, avoiding the tiniest bump whose noise might give me away.

It took me five minutes to reach the door at the far end, which led into the library.

I was about to open it when a gasp from Captain Nemo nailed me to the spot.

I realized that he was standing up.

I even got a glimpse of him because some rays of light from the library had filtered into the lounge.

He was coming toward me, arms crossed, silent, not walking but gliding like a ghost.

His chest was heaving, swelling with sobs.

And I heard him murmur these words, the last of his to reach my ears: "O almighty God!

Enough!

Enough!"

Was it a vow of repentance that had just escaped from this man's conscience .

.

.

?

Frantic, I rushed into the library.

I climbed the central companionway, and going along the upper gangway, I arrived at the skiff.

I went through the opening that had already given access to my two companions.

"Let's go, let's go!"

I exclaimed.

"Right away!"

the Canadian replied.

First, Ned Land closed and bolted the opening cut into the Nautilus's sheet iron, using the monkey wrench he had with him.

After likewise closing the opening in the skiff, the Canadian began to unscrew the nuts still bolting us to the underwater boat.

Suddenly a noise from the ship's interior became audible.

Voices were answering each other hurriedly.

What was it?

Had they spotted our escape?

I felt Ned Land sliding a dagger into my hand.

"Yes,"

I muttered, "we know how to die!"

The Canadian paused in his work.

But one word twenty times repeated, one dreadful word, told me the reason for the agitation spreading aboard the Nautilus.

We weren't the cause of the crew's concern.

"Maelstrom!

Maelstrom!"

they were shouting.

The Maelstrom!

Could a more frightening name have rung in our ears under more frightening circumstances?

Were we lying in the dangerous waterways off the Norwegian coast?

Was the Nautilus being dragged into this whirlpool just as the skiff was about to detach from its plating?

As you know, at the turn of the tide, the waters confined between the Faroe and Lofoten Islands rush out with irresistible violence.

They form a vortex from which no ship has ever been able to escape.

Monstrous waves race together from every point of the horizon.

They form a whirlpool aptly called "the ocean's navel,"

whose attracting power extends a distance of fifteen kilometers.

It can suck down not only ships but whales, and even polar bears from the northernmost regions.

This was where the Nautilus had been sent accidentally-- or perhaps deliberately--by its captain.

It was sweeping around in a spiral whose radius kept growing smaller and smaller.

The skiff, still attached to the ship's plating, was likewise carried around at dizzying speed.

I could feel us whirling.

I was experiencing that accompanying nausea that follows such continuous spinning motions.

We were in dread, in the last stages of sheer horror, our blood frozen in our veins, our nerves numb, drenched in cold sweat as if from the throes of dying!

And what a noise around our frail skiff!

What roars echoing from several miles away!

What crashes from the waters breaking against sharp rocks on the seafloor, where the hardest objects are smashed, where tree trunks are worn down and worked into "a shaggy fur,"

as Norwegians express it!

What a predicament!

We were rocking frightfully.

The Nautilus defended itself like a human being.

Its steel muscles were cracking.

Sometimes it stood on end, the three of us along with it!

"We've got to hold on tight,"

Ned said, "and screw the nuts down again!

If we can stay attached to the Nautilus, we can still make it .

.

.

!"

He hadn't finished speaking when a cracking sound occurred.

The nuts gave way, and ripped out of its socket, the skiff was hurled like a stone from a sling into the midst of the vortex.

My head struck against an iron timber, and with this violent shock I lost consciousness.

Conclusion WE COME TO the conclusion of this voyage under the seas.

What happened that night, how the skiff escaped from the Maelstrom's fearsome eddies, how Ned Land, Conseil, and I got out of that whirlpool, I'm unable to say.

But when I regained consciousness, I was lying in a fisherman's hut on one of the Lofoten Islands.

My two companions, safe and sound, were at my bedside clasping my hands.

We embraced each other heartily.

Just now we can't even dream of returning to France.

Travel between upper Norway and the south is limited.

So I have to wait for the arrival of a steamboat that provides bimonthly service from North Cape.

So it is here, among these gallant people who have taken us in, that I'm reviewing my narrative of these adventures.

It is accurate.

Not a fact has been omitted, not a detail has been exaggerated.

It's the faithful record of this inconceivable expedition into an element now beyond human reach, but where progress will someday make great inroads.

Will anyone believe me?

I don't know.

Ultimately it's unimportant.

What I can now assert is that I've earned the right to speak of these seas, beneath which in less than ten months, I've cleared 20,000 leagues in this underwater tour of the world that has shown me so many wonders across the Pacific, the Indian Ocean, the Red Sea, the Mediterranean, the Atlantic, the southernmost and northernmost seas!

But what happened to the Nautilus?

Did it withstand the Maelstrom's clutches?

Is Captain Nemo alive?

Is he still under the ocean pursuing his frightful program of revenge, or did he stop after that latest mass execution?

Will the waves someday deliver that manuscript that contains his full life story?

Will I finally learn the man's name?

Will the nationality of the stricken warship tell us the nationality of Captain Nemo?

I hope so.

I likewise hope that his powerful submersible has defeated the sea inside its most dreadful whirlpool, that the Nautilus has survived where so many ships have perished!

If this is the case and Captain Nemo still inhabits the ocean-- his adopted country--may the hate be appeased in that fierce heart!

May the contemplation of so many wonders extinguish the spirit of vengeance in him!

May the executioner pass away, and the scientist continue his peaceful exploration of the seas!

If his destiny is strange, it's also sublime.

Haven't I encompassed it myself?

Didn't I lead ten months of this otherworldly existence?

Thus to that question asked 6,000 years ago in the Book of Ecclesiastes--"Who can fathom the soundless depths?"-- two men out of all humanity have now earned the right to reply.

Captain Nemo and I.

END OF THE SECOND PART End of the Project Gutenberg Etext of 20000 Leagues Under the Seas by Jules Verne